It was he that commanded the heavenly host that came to the help of the Crusaders against the Turks, under the walls of Antioch, in the year 1098, on which occasion he was seen on his white horse, bearing the white banner with the red cross. He manifested himself again at the storming of Jerusalem in the following year, and a hundred years later was seen to fight in the front rank against the Moors in Spain, and for Frederic Barbarossa, in his crusade in 1190. But though he had entered into the service of the German emperor, this did not prevent his aiding the orthodox William of Holland in taking Aix-la-Chapelle from the excommunicated Emperor Frederic in 1248.--The most various races have contended for his protection. His feast was in 1222 ordered to be kept as a holiday throughout all England: from the beginning of the 14th century, or since the Mongol dominion was shaken off, he has been one of the guardian saints of Russia: in 1468, the Emperor Frederic III. founded the Austrian Order of St. George for the protection of the Empire against the Turks, and a few years later, in 1471, at the momentous battle of Brunkeberg, his name was the war-cry of both parties, Swedes and Danes.
That the subjugation of the Dragon (a symbolical mode of representing the extinction of Evil common to all times and peoples) should be attributed to St. George, would seem to be sufficiently explained by his having become the Christian Hero of the Middle Ages. A special reason may, however, be alleged for his connection with such a legend.
Long before the Crusades, he was depicted by the artists of the Oriental Church as the Great Martyr, with the Dragon (Anti-Christ or the Devil) at his feet, and a crowned virgin (the Church) at his side.
In like manner had Constantine the Great had himself drawn, and many other saints are represented in the same way, as Theodore, Victor, and Margaret. This symbolic representation would naturally lead to the Crusaders making St. George the hero in an achievement which was well known in connection with other names: and it would then not be too much to assume that the Normans (who, as already said, were the first to recognize his presence in battle),--the same Normans who were properly the creators of the romantic poetry of the Middle Ages,--were also the first to connect St. George with the conquest of the Dragon.
But however we may account for St. George's being introduced into such a legend, so much is sure; that from the 14th century on, the story and the hero have been inseparable: all the legendaries and all the pictures of him exhibit him as the conqueror of the Dragon: his martyrdom is nearly lost sight of, and in ballads is entirely forgotten.--As to the place which was the scene of the fight, there are many opinions. Some have fixed it in Cappadocia, others in Lybia, others in Syria, and some European nations have assigned the adventure to a locality within their own bounds. Thus the Wallachians lay the scene at Orwoza, one of the Wendish ballads at Berlin, the Germans at Leipsic, the Dutch at Oudenarde, and--the people of the island of Funen at Svendborg!
Of Hector's deeds did Homer sing, And of the sack of stately Troy, What griefs fair Helena did bring, Which was Sir Paris' only joy:
And by my pen I will recite 5 St. George's deeds, an English knight.
Against the Sarazens so rude Fought he full long and many a day, Where many gyaunts he subdu'd, In honour of the Christian way; 10 And after many adventures past, To Egypt land he came at last.
Now, as the story plain doth tell, Within that countrey there did rest A dreadful dragon, fierce and fell, 15 Whereby they were full sore opprest:
Who by his poisonous breath each day Did many of the city slay.
The grief whereof did grow so great Throughout the limits of the land, 20 That they their wise men did intreat To shew their cunning out of hand;
What way they might this fiend destroy, That did the countrey thus annoy.
The wise men all before the king, 25 This answer fram'd incontinent:
The dragon none to death might bring By any means they could invent;
His skin more hard than brass was found, That sword nor spear could pierce nor wound. 30 When this the people understood, They cryed out most piteouslye, The dragon's breath infects their blood, That every day in heaps they dye;
Among them such a plague is bred, 35 The living scarce could bury the dead.
No means there were, as they could hear, For to appease the dragon's rage, But to present some virgin clear, Whose blood his fury might asswage; 40 Each day he would a maiden eat, For to allay his hunger great.
This thing by art the wise men found, Which truly must observed be;
Wherefore, throughout the city round, 45 A virgin pure of good degree Was, by the king's commission, still Taken up to serve the dragon's will.
Thus did the dragon every day Untimely crop some virgin flowr, 50 Till all the maids were worn away, And none were left him to devour;
Saving the king's fair daughter bright, Her father's only heart's delight.
Then came the officers to the king, 55 That heavy message to declare, Which did his heart with sorrow sting;
"She is," quoth he, "my kingdom's heir:
O let us all be poisoned here, Ere she should die, that is my dear." 60 Then rose the people presently, And to the king in rage they went;
They said his daughter dear should dye, The dragon's fury to prevent:
"Our daughters all are dead," quoth they, 65 "And have been made the dragon's prey;
"And by their blood we rescued were, And thou hast sav'd thy life thereby;
And now in sooth it is but faire, For us thy daughter so should die." 70 "O save my daughter," said the king, "And let ME feel the dragon's sting."
Then fell fair Sabra on her knee, And to her father dear did say, "O father, strive not thus for me, 75 But let me be the dragon's prey;
It may be, for my sake alone This plague upon the land was thrown.
"'Tis better I should dye," she said, "Than all your subjects perish quite; 80 Perhaps the dragon here was laid, For my offence to work his spite, And after he hath suckt my gore, Your land shall feel the grief no more."
"What hast thou done, my daughter dear, 85 For to deserve this heavy scourge?
It is my fault, as may appear, Which makes the gods our state to purge;
Then ought I die, to stint the strife, And to preserve thy happy life." 90 Like mad-men, all the people cried, "Thy death to us can do no good;
Our safely only doth abide In making her the dragon's food."
"Lo! here I am, I come," quoth she, 95 "Therefore do what you will with me."
"Nay stay, dear daughter," quoth the queen, "And as thou art a virgin bright, That hast for vertue famous been, So let me cloath thee all in white; 100 And crown thy head with flowers sweet, An ornament for virgins meet."
And when she was attired so, According to her mother's mind, Unto the stake then did she go, 105 To which her tender limbs they bind;
And being bound to stake a thrall, She bade farewell unto them all.
"Farewell, my father dear," quoth she, "And my sweet mother, meek and mild; 110 Take you no thought nor weep for me, For you may have another child;
Since for my country's good I dye, Death I receive most willinglye."
The king and queen and all their train 115 With weeping eyes went then their way, And let their daughter there remain, To be the hungry dragon's prey:
But as she did there weeping lye, Behold St. George came riding by. 120 And seeing there a lady bright So rudely tyed unto a stake, As well became a valiant knight, He straight to her his way did take:
"Tell me, sweet maiden," then quoth he, 125 "What caitif thus abuseth thee?
"And, lo! by Christ his cross I vow, Which here is figured on my breast, I will revenge it on his brow, And break my lance upon his chest:" 130 And speaking thus whereas he stood, The dragon issued from the wood.
The lady, that did first espy The dreadful dragon coming so, Unto St. George aloud did cry, 135 And willed him away to go;
"Here comes that cursed fiend," quoth she, "That soon will make an end of me."
St. George then looking round about, The fiery dragon soon espy'd, 140 And like a knight of courage stout, Against him did most fiercely ride;
And with such blows he did him greet, He fell beneath his horse's feet.
For with his launce, that was so strong, 145 As he came gaping in his face, In at his mouth he thrust along;
For he could pierce no other place:
And thus within the lady's view This mighty dragon straight he slew. 150 The savour of his poisoned breath Could do this holy knight no harm;
Thus he the lady sav'd from death, And home he led her by the arm;
Which when King Ptolemy did see, 155 There was great mirth and melody.
When as that valiant champion there Had slain the dragon in the field, To court he brought the lady fair, Which to their hearts much joy did yield, 160 He in the court of Egypt staid Till he most falsely was betray'd.
That lady dearly lov'd the knight, He counted her his only joy;
But when their love was brought to light, 165 It turn'd unto their great annoy.
Th' Morocco king was in the court, Who to the orchard did resort;
Dayly, to take the pleasant air;
For pleasure sake he us'd to walk; 170 Under a wall he oft did hear St. George with Lady Sabra talk;
Their love he shew'd unto the king, Which to St. George great woe did bring.
Those kings together did devise 175 To make the Christian knight away:
With letters him in curteous wise They straightway sent to Persia, But wrote to the sophy him to kill, And treacherously his blood to spill. 180 Thus they for good did him reward With evil, and most subtilly, By such vile meanes, they had regard To work his death most cruelly;
Who, as through Persia land he rode, 185 With zeal destroy'd each idol god.
For which offence he straight was thrown Into a dungeon dark and deep;
Where, when he thought his wrongs upon, He bitterly did wail and weep: 190 Yet like a knight of courage stout, At length his way he digged out.
Three grooms of the King of Persia By night this valiant champion slew, Though he had fasted many a day, 195 And then away from thence he flew On the best steed the sophy had;
Which when he knew he was full mad.
Towards Christendom he made his flight, But met a gyant by the way, 200 With whom in combat he did fight Most valiantly a summer's day:
Who yet, for all his bats of steel, Was forc'd the sting of death to feel.
Back o'er the seas, with many bands 205 Of warlike souldiers soon he past, Vowing upon those heathen lands To work revenge; which at the last, Ere thrice three years were gone and spent, He wrought unto his heart's content. 210 Save onely Egypt land he spar'd, For Sabra bright her only sake, And, ere for her he had regard, He meant a tryal kind to make:
Meanwhile the king, o'ercome in field, 215 Unto Saint George did quickly yield.
Then straight Morocco's king he slew, And took fair Sabra to his wife, But meant to try if she were true, Ere with her he would lead his life; 220 And, tho' he had her in his train, She did a virgin pure remain.
Toward England then that lovely dame The brave St. George conducted strait, An eunuch also with them came, 225 Who did upon the lady wait.
These three from Egypt went alone:
Now mark St. George's valour shown.
When as they in a forest were, The lady did desire to rest: 230 Meanwhile St. George to kill a deer For their repast did think it best:
Leaving her with the eunuch there, Whilst he did go to kill the deer.
But lo! all in his absence came 235 Two hungry lyons, fierce and fell, And tore the eunuch on the same In pieces small, the truth to tell;
Down by the lady then they laid, Whereby they shew'd she was a maid. 240 But when he came from hunting back, And did behold this heavy chance, Then for his lovely virgin's sake His courage strait he did advance, And came into the lions sight, 245 Who ran at him with all their might.
Their rage did him no whit dismay, Who, like a stout and valiant knight, Did both the hungry lyons slay Within the Lady Sabra's sight: 250 Who all this while, sad and demure, There stood most like a virgin pure.
Now when St. George did surely know This lady was a virgin true, His heart was glad, that erst was woe, 255 And all his love did soon renew:
He set her on a palfrey steed, And towards England came with speed.
Where being in short space arriv'd Unto his native dwelling place, 260 Therein with his dear love he liv'd, And fortune did his nuptials grace:
They many years of joy did see, And led their lives at Coventry.
THE SEVEN CHAMPIONS OF CHRISTENDOM.
_The Famous Historie of the Seven Champions of Christendom_, is the work of Richard Johnson, a ballad maker of some note at the end of the 16th and beginning of the 17th century. All that is known of him may be seen in Chappel's Introduction to the _Crown Garland of Golden Roses_, of which Johnson was the compiler or the author. (Percy Society, vol. vi.) "The Story of St. George and the Fair Sabra," says Percy, "is taken almost verbatim from the old poetical legend of Sir Bevis of Hampton."
The _Seven Champions_ is twice entered on the Stationers' Registers in the year 1596. It is here reprinted from _A Collection of Old Ballads_, 1723, vol. i. 28. The same copy is in Evans's collection, i. 372.
Now of the Seven Champions here My purpose is to write, To show how they with sword and spear Put many foes to flight;
Distressed ladies to release, 5 And captives bound in chains, That Christian glory to increase Which evermore remains.
First, I give you to understand That great Saint George by name, 10 Was the true champion of our land;
And of his birth and fame, And of his noble mother's dream, Before that he was born, The which to her did clearly seem 15 Her days would be forlorn.
This was her dream; that she did bear A dragon in her womb;
Which griev'd this noble lady fair, 'Cause death must be her doom. 20 This sorrow she could not conceal, So dismal was her fear, So that she did the same reveal Unto her husband dear;
Who went for to inquire straight 25 Of an enchanteress;
When, knocking at her iron gate, Her answer it was this:
"The lady shall bring forth a son, By whom, in tract of time, 30 Great noble actions shall be done;
He will to honour climb.
"For he shall be in banners wore;
This truth I will maintain;
Your lady, she shall die before 35 You see her face again."
His leave he took, and home he went;
His wife departed lay;
But that which did his grief augment, The child was stole away. 40 Then did he travel in despair, Where soon with grief he died;
While the young child, his son and heir, Did constantly abide With the wise lady of the grove, 45 In her enchanted cell;
Amongst the woods he oft did rove, His beauty pleased her well.
Blinded with love, she did impart, Upon a certain day, 50 To him her cunning magic art, And where six Champions lay Within a brazen castle strong, By an enchanted sleep, And where they had continued long; 55 She did the castle keep.
She taught and show'd him every thing Through being free and fond;
Which did her fatal ruin bring;
For with a silver wand 60 He clos'd her up into a rock, By giving one small stroke;
So took possession of her stock, And the enchantment broke.
Those Christian Champions being freed 65 From their enchanted state, Each mounted on his prancing steed, And took to travel straight;
Where we will leave them to pursue Kind fortune's favours still, 70 To treat of our own champion, who Did courts with wonders fill.
For as he came to understand, At an old hermit's cell, How, in the vast Egyptian land, 75 A dragon fierce and fell Threatened the ruin of them all, By his devouring jaws, His sword releas'd them from that thrall, And soon remov'd the cause. 80 This dreadful dragon must destroy A virgin every day, Or else with stinks he'll them annoy, And many thousands slay.
At length the king's own daughter dear, 85 For whom the court did mourn, Was brought to be devoured here, For she must take her turn.
The king by proclamation said, If any hardy knight 90 Could free this fair young royal maid, And slay the dragon quite, Then should he have her for his bride, And, after death, likewise His crown and kingdom too beside: 95 Saint George he won the prize.
When many hardy strokes he'd dealt, And could not pierce his hide, He run his sword up to the hilt In at the dragon's side; 100 By which he did his life destroy, Which cheer'd the drooping king;
This caused an universal joy, Sweet peals of bells did ring.
The daughter of a king, for pride 105 Transformed into a tree Of mulberries, Saint Denis[L107] spied, And being hungery, Of that fair fruit he ate a part, And was transformed likewise 110 Into the fashion of a hart, For seven years precise.
At which he long bewail'd the loss Of manly shape: then goes To him his true and trusty horse, 115 And brings a blushing rose, By which the magic spell was broke, And both were fairly freed From the enchanted heavy yoke:
They then in love agreed. 120 Now we come to Saint James of Spain, Who slew a mighty boar, In hopes that he might honour gain, But he must die therefore:
Who was allow'd his death to choose, 125 Which was by virgins' darts, But they the same did all refuse, So tender were their hearts.
The king's daughter at length, by lot, Was doomed to work his woe; 130 From her fair hands a fatal shot, Out of a golden bow, Must put a period to the strife;
At which grief did her seize.
She of her father begg'd his life 135 Upon her bended knees;
Saying, "my gracious sovereign Lord, And honoured father dear, He well deserves a large reward;
Then be not so severe. 140 Give me his life!" He grants the boon, And then without delay, This Spanish champion, ere 'twas noon, Rid with her quite away.
Now come we to Saint Anthony, 145 A man with valour fraught, The champion of fair Italy, Who many wonders wrought.
First, he a mighty giant slew, The terror of mankind: 150 Young ladies fair, pure virgins too, This giant kept confined Within his castle walls of stone, And gates of solid brass, Where seven ladies made their moan, 155 But out they could not pass.
Many brave lords, and knights likewise, To free them did engage, Who fell a bleeding sacrifice To this fierce giant's rage. 160 Fair daughters to a royal king!
Yet fortune, after all, Did our renowned champion bring To free them from their thrall.
Assisted by the hand of heaven, 165 He ventured life and limb:
Behold the fairest of the seven, She fell in love with him.
That champion good, bold Saint Andrew, The famous Scottish knight, 170 Dark gloomy deserts travelled through, Where Phoebus gave no light.
Haunted with spirits, for a while His weary course he steers, Till fortune blessed him with a smile, 175 And shook off all his fears.
This Christian champion travell'd long, Till at the length he came Unto the giant's castle strong, Great Blanderon by name, 180 Where the king's daughters were transform'd Into the shape of swans:
Though them he freed, their father storm'd, But he his malice shuns.
For though five hundred armed knights 185 Did straight beset him round, Our Christian champion with them fights, Till on the heathen ground Most of those Pagans bleeding lay;
Which much perplexed the king; 190 The Scottish champion clears the way, Which was a glorious thing.
Saint Patrick too, of Ireland, That noble knight of fame, He travelled, as we understand, 195 Till at the length he came Into a grove where satyrs dwelt, Where ladies he beheld, Who had their raged fury felt, And were with sorrow fill'd. 200 He drew his sword, and did maintain A sharp and bloody fray, Till the ring-leader he had slain;
The rest soon fled away.
This done, he asked the ladies fair, 205 Who were in silks array'd, From whence they came, and who they were.
They answered him and said:
"We are all daughters to a king, Whom a brave Scottish knight 210 Did out of tribulation bring:
He having took his flight, Now after him we are in quest."
Saint Patrick then replies, "He is my friend, I cannot rest 215 Till I find him likewise.
"So, ladies, if you do intend To take your lot with me, This sword of mine shall you defend From savage cruelty." 220 The ladies freely gave consent To travel many miles;
Through shady groves and woods they went, In search of fortune's smiles.
The Christian champion David, went 225 To the Tartarian court, Where at their tilt and tournament, And such like royal sport, He overthrew the only son Of the Count Palatine; 230 This noble action being done His fame began to shine.
The young Count's sad and sudden death Turn'd all their joys to grief;
He bleeding lay, bereaved of breath, 235 The father's son in chief;
But lords and ladies blazed the fame Of our brave champion bold;
Saying, they ought to write his name In characters of gold. 240 Here have I writ a fair account Of each heroic deed, Done by these knights, which will surmount All those that shall succeed.
The ancient chronicles of kings, 245 Ere since the world begun, Can't boast of such renowned things As these brave knights have done.
Saint George he was for England, Saint Dennis was for France, 250 Saint James for Spain, whose valiant hand Did Christian fame advance:
Saint Anthony for Italy, Andrew for Scots ne'er fails, Patrick too stands for Ireland, 255 Saint David was for Wales.
Thus have you those stout champions names In this renowned song:
Young captive ladies bound in chains, Confined in castles strong, 260 They did by knightly prowess free, True honour to maintain:
Then let their lasting memory From age to age remain.
107, which Dennis.
THOMAS OF ERSSELDOUNE.
This beautiful tale is transferred to these pages from Mr. Laing's _Select Remains of the Ancient Popular Poetry of Scotland_. The two "fytts" of prophecies which accompany it in the manuscripts, are omitted here, as being probably the work of another, and an inferior, hand. From the exordium by which the story is introduced, it might be concluded that the author was an Englishman. Indeed, all the poems and prophecies attributed to Thomas the Rhimer which remain to us, are preserved in English manuscripts and an English dress; but, in the judgment of Mr. Jamieson, the internal evidence still almost amounts to proof that the romance itself was of Scottish origin, although no indubitably Scottish copy is now known to be in existence.
The hero of this legend is believed to have lived through nearly the whole of the 13th century. He derived his territorial appellation from the village of Erceldoune, in the county of Berwick, lying on the river Leader, about two miles above its junction with the Tweed. The Huntly bank on which the meeting of Thomas with the Queen of Fairy took place, is situated, according to Mr. Laing, on one of the Eldoun hills, but the same distinction is claimed for another place of like name, which, together with an adjoining ravine, called from time immemorial the _Rymer's Glen_, was included in the domain of Abbotsford. (See _Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_, iv. 110. v. 1.) "During the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries, to get up a prophecy in the name of Thomas the Rhymer appears to have been found a good stroke of policy on many occasions. Thus was his authority employed to countenance the views of Edward III. against Scottish independence, to favor the ambitious views of the Duke of Albany in the minority of James V., and to sustain the spirits of the nation under the harassing invasions of Henry VIII. A small volume containing a collection of the rhymes thus put into circulation was published by Andro Hart in Edinburgh, in 1615."--CHAMBERS, _Pop. Rhymes of Scotland_, p. 6.
"This poem," says Mr. Laing, "is preserved in three ancient manuscripts, each of them in a state more or less mutilated, and varying in no inconsiderable degree from the others. A portion of it was first printed in the _Border Minstrelsy_, [iv. 122,] from the fragment in the British Museum, among the Cotton MSS.; and the one which Mr. Jamieson adopted in his collection of _Popular Ballads and Songs_ [ii. 11,] was carefully deciphered from a volume of no ordinary curiosity, in the University Library, Cambridge, written in a very illegible hand, about the middle of the 15th century. It is now printed from the other copy, as it occurs in a volume, compiled at a still earlier period, which is preserved in the Cathedral Library of Lincoln. On comparison, it will be readily perceived, that the text is in every respect preferable to that of either of the other manuscripts.... An endeavor has been made to fill up the defective parts from the Cambridge copy, though in some instances, as will be seen, without success."--Mr. Halliwell has republished the Cambridge text in his _Fairy Mythology_, (p. 58,) and he cites a fourth manuscript, which, however, appears to be of slight importance.
THOMAS OF ERSSELDOUNE.
Lystnys, lordyngs, bothe grete and smale, And takis gude tente what I will say:
I sall yow telle als trewe a tale, Als euer was herde by nyghte or daye:
And the maste meruelle fforowttyn naye, 5 That euer was herde byfore or syen, And therfore pristly I yow praye, That ye will of youre talkyng blyn.
It es an harde thyng for to saye, Of doghety dedis that hase bene done; 10 Of felle feghtyngs and batells sere;
And how that knyghtis hase wonne thair schone.
Bot Jhesu Christ, that syttis in trone, Safe Ynglysche men bothe ferre and nere;
And I sall telle yow tyte and sone, 15 Of battells done sythen many a yere;
And of batells that done sall bee;
In whate place, and howe and whare;
And wha sall hafe the heghere gree;
And whethir partye sall hafe the werre; 20 [Transcriber's note: one stanza missing here, lines 21-24] Wha sall take the flyghte and flee; 25 And wha sall dye and byleue thare:
Bot Jhesu Christ, that dyed on tre, Saue Inglysche men whare so thay fare.
* * * * * Als I me wente this endres-daye, Full faste in mynd makane my mone, In a mery mornynge of May, By Huntle bankkes my selfe allone, I herde the jaye, and the 'throstelle,'[L5] 5 The mawys menyde of hir songe, The wodewale beryde als a belle, That all the wode abowte me ronge.
Allone in longynge, thus als I laye, Vndre nethe a semely tre, 10 'Saw I' whare a lady gaye, 'Came ridand' ouer a longe lee.
If I suld sytt to Domesdaye, With my tonge, to wrebbe and wrye, Certanely that lady gaye, 15 Neuer bese scho askryede for mee.
Hir palfraye was a dappill graye;
Swilke one I saghe ne neuer none:
Als dose the sonne, on someres daye, That faire lady hir selfe scho schone. 20 Hir selle[L21] it was of reele bone, Full semely was that syghte to see!
Stefly sett with precyous stones, And compaste all with crapotee, Stones of Oryence, grete plente. 25 Hir hare abowte hir hede it hange;
Scho rode ouer that lange lee;
A whylle scho blewe, a nother scho sange.
Hir garthes of nobyll sylke they were;
The bukylls were of berelle stone; 30 Hir steraps were of crystalle clere, And all with perelle ouer bygone.
Hir payetrelle was of iralle fyne;
Hir cropoure was of orfare;
And als clere golde hir brydill it schone; 35 One aythir syde hange bellys three.
'Scho led seuen grew houndis in a leeshe;'
And seuen raches by hir they rone;
Scho bare a horne abowte hir halse;
And vnder hir belte full many a flone. 40 Thomas laye and sawe that syghte, Vnder nethe ane semly tree;
He sayd, "yone es Marye most of myghte, That bare that childe that dyede for mee.
"But if I speke with yone lady bryghte, 45 I hope myn herte will bryste in three;
Now sall I go with all my myghte, Hir for to mete at Eldoun tree."
Thomas rathely vpe he rase, And he rane ouer that mountayne hye; 50 Gyff it be als the storye sayes, He hir mette at Eldone tree.
He knelyde down appon his knee, Vndir nethe that grenwode spraye:-- And sayd, "lufly ladye! rewe one mee; 55 Qwene of heuen, als thu wele maye!"
Then spake that lady milde of thoghte:-- "Thomas, late swylke wordes bee;
Qwene of heuenne, am I noghte, For I tuke neuer so heghe degre. 60 "Bot I ame of ane other contree, If I be payrelde moste of prysse;
I ryde aftyre this wylde fee;
My raches rynnys at my devyse."
"If thu be parelde moste of prysse, 65 And here rydis thus in thy folye, Of lufe, lady, als thu art wysse, Thou gyffe me leue to lye the bye."
Scho sayde, "thu man, that ware folye;
I praye the, Thomas, thu lat me bee; 70 Ffor I saye the full sekirlye, That syne will fordoo all my beaute."
"Now lufly ladye rewe on mee, And I will euer more with the duelle;
Here my trouthe I 'plyghte to thee,' 75 Wethir thu will in heuen or helle."
"Mane of molde, thu will me marre, But yitt thu sall hafe all thy will;
And trowe it wele, thu chewys the werre, Ffor alle my beaute will thu spylle." 80 Down than lyghte that lady bryghte, Vndir nethe that grene wode spraye;
And, als the storye tellis full ryghte, Seuen sythis by hir he laye.
Scho sayd, "man, the lykes thi playe: 85 What byrde in boure maye delle with the?
Thou merrys me all this longe daye;
I pray the, Thomas, late me bee."
Thomas stode wpe in that stede, And he byhelde that lady gaye; 90 Hir hare it hange all ouer hir hede, Hir eghne semede owte, that are were graye.
And all the riche clothynge was awaye, That he byfore sawe in that stede;
Hir a schanke blake, hir other graye, 95 And all hir body lyke the lede;
Thomas laye, and sawe that syghte, Vndir nethe that grenewod tree.
Than sayd Thomas, "allas! allas!
In faythe this es a dullfull syghte; 100 How arte thu fadyde thus in the face, That schane byfore als the sonne so bryght!"
Scho sayd, "Thomas, take leve at sone and mone, And als at lefe that grewes on tree;
This twelmoneth sall thu with me gone, 105 And medill-erthe thu sall non see."
He knelyd downe appon his knee, Vndir nethe that grenewod spraye;
And sayd, "Lufly lady![L109] rewe on mee, Mylde qwene of heuen, als thu beste maye." 110 "Allas!" he sayd, "and wa es mee, I trewe my dedis will wirke me care;
My saulle, Jhesu, byteche I the, Whedir come that euer my banes sall fare."
Scho ledde hym in at Eldone hill, 115 Vndir nethe a derne lee;
Whare it was dirk as mydnyght myrke, And euer the water till his knee.
The montenans of dayes three, He herd bot swoghyne of the flode; 120 At the laste, he sayde, "full wa es mee!
Almaste I dye, for fawte of fude."
Scho lede hym in till a faire herbere, Whare frwte was 'growyng in gret plentee;'
Pers and appill, bothe rype thay were, 125 The date, and als the damasee;
The fygge, and als so the wyne-berye;
The nyghtyngales lyggande on thair neste;
The papeioyes faste abowte gan flye;
And throstylls sange, wolde hafe no reste. 130 He pressede to pulle frowte with his hande, Als man for fude that was nere faynt;
Scho sayd, "Thomas, thu late tham stande, Or ells the fende the will atteynt.
"If thu it plokk, sothely to say, 135 Thi saule gose to the fyre of helle;
It comes neuer owte or Domesdaye, Bot ther in payne ay for to duelle.
"Thomas, sothely, I the hyghte, Come lygge thyn hede down on my knee, 140 And 'thou' sall se the fayreste syghte, That euer sawe man of thi contree."
He did in hye als scho hym badde;
Appone hir knee his hede he layde, Ffor hir to paye he was full glade, 145 And than that lady to him sayde-- "Seese thu nowe yone faire waye, That lyggis ouer yone heghe montayne?-- Yone es the waye to heuen for aye, When synfull sawles are passed ther payne. 150 "Seese thu nowe yone other waye, That lygges lawe by nethe yone rysse?
Yone es the waye, the sothe to saye, Vnto the joye of paradyse.
"Seese thu yitt yone third waye, 155 That ligges vnder yone grene playne?
Yone es the waye, with tene and traye, Whare synfull saulis suffiris thare payne.
"Bot seese thu nowe yone forthe waye, That lygges ouer yone depe delle? 160 Yone es the way, so waylawaye, Vnto the byrnande fyre of hell.
"Seese thu yitt yone faire castelle, That standes vpone yone heghe hill?
Of towne and towre, it beris the belle; 165 In erthe es none lyk it vntill.
"Ffor sothe, Thomas, yone es myn awenn, And the kynges of this countree;
Bot me ware leuer hanged and drawen, Or that he wyste thou laye me by. 170 "When thu commes to yone castelle gay, I pray the curtase man to bee;
And whate so any man to the saye, Luke thu answere none bott mee.
"My lorde es seruede at ylk a mese, 175 With thritty knyghttis faire and free;
I sail saye, syttande at the dasse, I tuke thi speche byyonde the see."
Thomas still als stane he stude.
And he byhelde that lady gaye; 180 Scho come agayne als faire and gude, And al so ryche one hir palfraye.
Hir grewe hundis fillide with dere blode;
Hir rachis couplede, by my faye;
Scho blewe hir horne with mayne and mode, 185 Vnto the castelle scho tuk the waye.
In to the haulle sothely scho went;
Thomas foloued at hir hande;
Than ladyes come, bothe faire and gent, With curtassye to hit knelande. 190 Harpe and fethill bothe thay fande, Getterne, and als so the sawtrye;
Lutte and rybybe, bothe gangande, And all manere of mynstralsye.
The most meruelle that Thomas thoghte, 195 When that he stode appon the flore;
Ffor feftty hertes in were broghte, That were bothe 'largely' grete and store.
Raches laye lapande in the blode, Cokes come with dryssynge knyfe; 200 They brittened tham als thay were wode;
Reuelle amanges thame was full ryfe.
Knyghtis dawnsede by three and three, Thare was revelle, gamen, and playe, Lufly ladyes, faire and free, 205 That satte and sange one riche araye.
Thomas duellide in that solace More than I yowe save, perde;
Till one a daye, so hafe I grace, My lufly lady sayde to mee: 210 "Do busk the, Thomas,--the busk agayne,[L211] Ffor thu may here no lengare be;
Hye the faste, with myghte and mayne;
I sall the brynge till Eldone tree."
Thomas sayde than with heuy chere; 215 "Lufly lady, nowe late me bee;
Ffor certis, lady, I hafe bene here Noghte bot the space of dayes three.
"Ffor sothe, Thomas, als I the telle, Thou hase bene here thre yere and more; 220 Bot langere here thu may noghte dwelle;
The skylle I sall the telle wherefore.
"To morne, of helle the foulle fende Amange this folke will feche his fee;
And thu arte mekill man and hende, 225 I trowe full wele he wolde chese the.
"Ffor all the gold that euer may bee, Ffro hethyn unto the worldis ende, Thou bese neuer betrayede for mee;
Therefore with me I rede thou wende." 230 Scho broghte hym agayne to Eldone tree, Vndir nethe that grenewode spraye;
In Huntlee bannkes es mery to bee, Whare fowles synges bothe nyght and daye.
"Fferre owtt in yone mountane graye, 235 Thomas, my fawkon byggis a neste;-- A fawcoun is an eglis praye;
Fforthi in na place may he reste.
"Ffare well, Thomas; I wend my waye;
Ffor me byhouys ouer thir benttis brown." 240 --Loo here a fytt: more es to saye, All of Thomas of Erselldown.-- 22, Laing, by tene. [Transcriber's note: this refers to line 22 of the first part, which is missing between pages 97 and 98.] 5, Linc. MS. throstylle cokke.
21, sette, Laing.
109, Lufly lady, i.e. Mary.
211, buse agayne.
THOMAS THE RHYMER.
TRADITIONAL VERSION.
_Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_, (iv. 117.) "Given from a copy obtained from a lady residing not far from Ercildoune, corrected and enlarged by one in Mrs. Brown's MSS."
True Thomas lay on Huntlie bank;
A ferlie he spied wi' his ee;
And there he saw a ladye bright, Come riding down by the Eildon Tree.
Her shirt was o' the grass-green silk, 5 Her mantle o' the velvet fyne;
At ilka tett of her horse's mane, Hung fifty siller bells and nine.
True Thomas, he pull'd aff his cap, And louted low down to his knee: 10 "All hail, thou mighty Queen of Heaven!
For thy peer on earth I never did see."-- "O no, O no, Thomas," she said, "That name does not belang to me;
I am but the Queen of fair Elfland, 15 That am hither come to visit thee.
"Harp and carp, Thomas," she said;
"Harp and carp along wi' me;
And if ye dare to kiss my lips, Sure of your bodie I will be."-- 20 "Betide me weal, betide me woe, That weird shall never daunton me."-- Syne he has kissed her rosy lips, All underneath the Eildon Tree.
"Now, ye maun go wi' me," she said; 25 "True Thomas, ye maun go wi' me;
And ye maun serve me seven years, Thro' weal or woe as may chance to be."
She mounted on her milk-white steed;
She's ta'en true Thomas up behind: 30 And aye, whene'er her bridle rung, The steed flew swifter than the wind.
O they rade on, and farther on;
The steed gaed swifter than the wind;
Until they reach'd a desert wide, 35 And living land was left behind.
"Light down, light down, now, true Thomas, And lean your head upon my knee;
Abide and rest a little space, And I will shew you ferlies three. 40 "O see ye not yon narrow road, So thick beset with thorns and briers?
That is the path of righteousness, Though after it but few enquires.
"And see ye not that braid braid road, 45 That lies across that lily leven?
That is the path of wickedness, Though some call it the road to heaven.
"And see not ye that bonny road, That winds about the fernie brae? 50 That is the road to fair Elfland, Where thou and I this night maun gae.
"But, Thomas, ye maun hold your tongue, Whatever ye may hear or see;
For, if you speak word in Elfyn land, 55 Ye'll ne'er get back to your ain countrie."
O they rade on, and farther on, And they waded through rivers aboon the knee, And they saw neither sun nor moon, But they heard the roaring of the sea. 60 It was mirk mirk night, and there was nae stern light, And they waded through red blude to the knee;
For a' the blude that's shed on earth Rins through the springs o' that countrie.
Syne they came on to a garden green, 65 And she pu'd an apple frae a tree-- "Take this for thy wages, true Thomas;
It will give thee the tongue that can never lie."-- "My tongue is mine ain," true Thomas said;
"A gudely gift ye wad gie to me![L70] 70 I neither dought to buy nor sell, At fair or tryst where I may be.
"I dought neither speak to prince or peer, Nor ask of grace from fair ladye."-- "Now hold thy peace!" the lady said, 75 "For as I say, so must it be."-- He has gotten a coat of the even cloth, And a pair of shoes of velvet green;
And till seven years were gane and past, True Thomas on earth was never seen. 80 70. The traditional commentary upon this ballad informs us, that the apple was the produce of the fatal Tree of Knowledge, and that the garden was the terrestrial paradise. The repugnance of Thomas to be debarred the use of falsehood, when he might find it convenient, has a comic effect. SCOTT.
THE YOUNG TAMLANE.
The _Tayl of the Yong Tamlene_ is mentioned in the _Complaynt of Scotland_, (1548,) and the dance of _Thom of Lyn_ is noticed in the same work. A considerable fragment of this ballad was printed by Herd, (vol. i. 215,) under the title of _Kertonha'_, a corruption of Carterhaugh; another is furnished in Maidment's _New Book of Old Ballads_, (p. 54,) and a nearly complete version in Johnson's _Museum_, (p. 423,) which, with some alterations, was inserted in the _Tales of Wonder_, (No. 58.) The present edition, prepared by Sir Walter Scott from a collation of various copies, is longer than any other, but was originally disfigured by several supposititious stanzas here omitted. Another version, with Maidment's fragment, will be found in the Appendix to this volume.
"Carterhaugh is a plain, at the conflux of the Ettrick and Yarrow in Selkirkshire, about a mile above Selkirk, and two miles below Newark Castle; a romantic ruin which overhangs the Yarrow, and which is said to have been the habitation of our heroine's father, though others place his residence in the tower of Oakwood. The peasants point out, upon the plain, those electrical rings, which vulgar credulity supposes to be traces of the Fairy revels. Here, they say, were placed the stands of milk, and of water, in which _Tamlane_ was dipped, in order to effect the disenchantment; and upon these spots, according to their mode of expressing themselves, the grass will never grow. Miles Cross, (perhaps a corruption of Mary's Cross,) where fair Janet awaited the arrival of the Fairy train, is said to have stood near the Duke of Buccleuch's seat of Bow-hill, about half a mile from Carterhaugh."--(SCOTT'S _Minstrelsy_, ii. 334, at the end of a most interesting essay, introductory to this tale, on the Fairies of Popular Superstition.) "O I forbid ye, maidens a', That wear gowd on your hair, To come or gae by Carterhaugh, For young Tamlane is there.
"There's nane that gaes by Carterhaugh, 5 But maun leave him a wad, Either gowd rings, or green mantles, Or else their maidenheid.
"Now gowd rings ye may buy, maidens, Green mantles ye may spin; 10 But, gin ye lose your maidenheid, Ye'll ne'er get that agen."-- But up then spak her, fair Janet, The fairest o' a' her kin;
"I'll cum and gang to Carterhaugh; 15 And ask nae leave o' him."-- Janet has kilted her green kirtle, A little abune her knee;
And she has braided her yellow hair, A little abune her bree. 20 And when she came to Carterhaugh, She gaed beside the well;
And there she fand his steed standing, But away was himsell.
She hadna pu'd a red red rose, 25 A rose but barely three;
Till up and starts a wee wee man, At lady Janet's knee.
Says--"Why pu' ye the rose, Janet?
What gars ye break the tree? 30 Or why come ye to Carterhaugh, Withouten leave o' me?"-- Says--"Carterhaugh it is mine ain;
My daddie gave it me;
I'll come and gang to Carterhaugh, 35 And ask nae leave o' thee."
He's ta'en her by the milk-white hand, Among the leaves sae green;
And what they did, I cannot tell-- The green leaves were between. 40 He's ta'en her by the milk-white hand, Among the roses red;
And what they did, I cannot say-- She ne'er return'd a maid.
When she cam to her father's ha', 45 She looked pale and wan;
They thought she'd dreed some sair sickness, Or been with some leman.
She didna comb her yellow hair, Nor make meikle o'er her head; 50 And ilka thing that lady took, Was like to be her deid.
It's four and twenty ladies fair Were playing at the ba';
Janet, the wightest of them anes, 55 Was faintest o' them a'.
Four and twenty ladies fair Were playing at the chess;
And out there came the fair Janet, As green as any grass. 60 Out and spak an auld grey-headed knight, Lay o'er the castle wa',-- "And ever, alas! for thee, Janet, But we'll be blamed a'!"-- "Now haud your tongue, ye auld grey knight! 65 And an ill deid may ye die;
Father my bairn on whom I will, I'll father nane on thee."-- Out then spak her father dear, And he spak meik and mild-- 70 "And ever, alas! my sweet Janet, I fear ye gae with child."-- "And if I be with child, father, Mysell maun bear the blame;
There's ne'er a knight about your ha' 75 Shall hae the bairnie's name.
"And if I be with child, father, 'Twill prove a wondrous birth;
For weel I swear I'm not wi' bairn To any man on earth. 80 "If my love were an earthly knight, As he's an elfin grey, I wadna gie my ain true love For nae lord that ye hae."-- She prink'd hersell and prinn'd hersell, 85 By the ae light of the moon, And she's away to Carterhaugh, To speak wi' young Tamlane.
And when she came to Carterhaugh, She gaed beside the well; 90 And there she saw the steed standing, But away was himsell.
She hadna pu'd a double rose, A rose but only twae, When up and started young Tamlane, 95 Says--"Lady, thou pu's nae mae!
"Why pu' ye the rose, Janet, Within this garden grene, And a' to kill the bonny babe, That we got us between?" 100 "The truth ye'll tell to me, Tamlane;
A word ye mauna lie;
Gin e'er ye was in haly chapel, Or sained in Christentie?"-- "The truth I'll tell to thee, Janet, 105 A word I winna lie;
A knight me got, and a lady me bore, As well as they did thee.
"Randolph, Earl Murray, was my sire, Dunbar, Earl March, is thine; 110 We loved when we were children small, Which yet you well may mind.
"When I was a boy just turn'd of nine, My uncle sent for me, To hunt, and hawk, and ride with him, 115 And keep him companie.
"There came a wind out of the north, A sharp wind and a snell;
And a deep sleep came over me, And frae my horse I fell. 120 "The Queen of Fairies keppit me, In yon green hill to dwell;
And I'm a fairy, lyth and limb;
Fair ladye, view me well.
"Then would I never tire, Janet, 125 In Elfish land to dwell;
But aye, at every seven years, They pay the teind to hell;
And I am sae fat and fair of flesh, I fear 'twill be mysell[L130]. 130 "This night is Hallowe'en, Janet, The morn is Hollowday;
And, gin ye dare your true love win, Ye hae nae time to stay.
"The night it is good Hallowe'en, 135 When fairy folk will ride;
And they that wad their true-love win, At Miles Cross they maun bide."
"But how shall I thee ken, Tamlane?
Or how shall I thee knaw, 140 Amang so many unearthly knights, The like I never saw?"
"The first company that passes by, Say na, and let them gae;
The next company that passes by, 145 Sae na, and do right sae;
The third company that passes by, Then I'll be ane o' thae.
"First let pass the black, Janet, And syne let pass the brown; 150 But grip ye to the milk-white steed, And pu' the rider down.
"For I ride on the milk-white steed, And aye nearest the town;
Because I was a christen'd knight, 155 They gave me that renown.
"My right hand will be gloved, Janet, My left hand will be bare;
And these the tokens I gie thee, Nae doubt I will be there. 160 "They'll turn me in your arms, Janet,[L161] An adder and a snake;
But had me fast, let me not pass, Gin ye wad buy me maik.
"They'll turn me in your arms, Janet, 165 An adder and an ask;
They'll turn me in your arms, Janet, A bale that burns fast.
"They'll turn me in your arms, Janet, A red-hot gad o' airn; 170 But haud me fast, let me not pass, For I'll do you no harm.
"First dip me in a stand o' milk, And then in a stand o' water;
But had me fast, let me not pass-- 175 I'll be your bairn's father.
"And, next, they'll shape me in your arms, A tod, but and an eel;
But had me fast, nor let me gang, As you do love me weel. 180 "They'll shape me in your arms, Janet, A dove, but and a swan;
And, last, they'll shape me in your arms A mother-naked man:
Cast your green mantle over me-- 185 I'll be myself again."-- Gloomy, gloomy, was the night, And eiry was the way, As fair Janet, in her green mantle, To Miles Cross she did gae. 190 Betwixt the hours of twelve and one, A north wind tore the bent;
And straight she heard strange elritch sounds Upon that wind which went.
About the dead hour o' the night, 195 She heard the bridles ring;
And Janet was as glad o' that As any earthly thing.
Will o' Wisp before them went, Sent forth a twinkling light; 200 And soon she saw the Fairy bands All riding in her sight.
And first gaed by the black black steed, And then gaed by the brown;
But fast she gript the milk-white steed, 205 And pu'd the rider down.
She pu'd him frae the milk-white steed, And loot the bridle fa';
And up there raise an erlish cry-- "He's won amang us a'!"-- 210 They shaped him in fair Janet's arms,[L208] An esk, but and an adder;
She held him fast in every shape-- To be her bairn's father.
They shaped him in her arms at last, 215 A mother-naked man:
She wrapt him in her green mantle, And sae her true love wan!
Up then spake the Queen o' Fairies, Out o' a bush o' broom-- 220 "She that has borrow'd young Tamlane, Has gotten a stately groom."-- Up then spake the Queen o' Fairies, Out o' a bush o' rye-- "She's ta'en awa the bonniest knight 225 In a' my cumpanie.
"But had I kenn'd, Tamlane," she says, "A lady wad borrow'd thee-- I wad ta'en out thy twa grey een, Put in twa een o' tree. 230 "Had I but kenn'd, Tamlane," she says, "Before ye came frae hame-- I wad ta'en out your heart o' flesh, Put in a heart o' stane.
"Had I but had the wit yestreen 235 That I hae coft the day-- I'd paid my kane seven times to hell Ere you'd been won away!"
130, See _Thomas of Ersseldoune_, (p. 107,) v. 225, 226.
V. 161-172, v. 208-214. The same process of disenchantment is found in the Danish ballad _Nattergalen_, st. 20-22, Grundtvig, No. 57 (also _Svenska Folk-visor_, No. 41). The comparison with the transformations of Proteus is curious.
[Grk: amphi de cheiras ballomen; oud' ho geron dolies epeletheto technes;
all' etoi protista leon genet' eugeneios, autar epeita drakon kai pordalis ede megas sus;
gigneto d' hygron hydor kai dendreon hypsipetelon.
hemeis d' astempheos echomen tetleoti thymo.] _Odyssey_, iv. 454-59.
Verum ubi correptum manibus vinclisque tenebis, Tum variae eludent species atque ora ferarum:
Fiet enim subito sus horridus atraque tigris, Squamosusque draco, et fulva cervice leaena, Aut acrem flammae sonitum dabit, atque ita vinclis Excidet, aut in aquas tenues dilapsus abibit.
Sed quanto ille magis formas se vertet in omnes, Tanto, nate, magis contende tenacia vincla.
_Georgics_, iv. 405-12.
THE WEE WEE MAN.
This ballad will be found, in forms slightly varying, in Herd, (i.
156;) Caw's _Poetical Museum_, (p. 348;) Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, (p. 343;) and Buchan's _Ancient Ballads_, (i. 263.) It bears some resemblance to the beginning of the remarkable poem, _Als Y Yod on ay Mounday_, (see Appendix). The present version is from the _Poetical Museum_.
As I was walking by my lane, Atween a water and a wa, There sune I spied a wee wee man, He was the least that eir I saw.
His legs were scant a shathmont's length, 5 And sma and limber was his thie;
Atween his shoulders was ae span,[L7] About his middle war but three.
He has tane up a meikle stane, And flang't as far as I cold see; 10 Ein thouch I had been Wallace wicht, I dought na lift it to my knie.
"O wee wee man, but ye be strang!
Tell me whar may thy dwelling be?"
"I dwell beneth that bonnie bouir, 15 O will ye gae wi me and see?"
On we lap, and awa we rade, Till we cam to a bonny green;
We lichted syne to bait our steid, And out there cam a lady sheen; 20 Wi four and twentie at her back, A' comely cled in glistering green;
Thouch there the King of Scots had stude, The warst micht weil hae been his queen.
On syne we past wi wondering cheir, 25 Till we cam to a bonny ha;
The roof was o the beaten gowd, The flure was o the crystal a.
When we cam there, wi wee wee knichts[L29] War ladies dancing, jimp and sma; 30 But in the twinkling of an eie, Baith green and ha war clein awa.
7. Much better in Motherwell.
Between his een there was a span, Betwixt his shoulders there were ells three.
29-32.
There were pipers playing in every neuk, And ladies dancing, jimp and sma';
And aye the owreturn o' their tune Was, "Our wee wee man has been lang awa!"-- MOTHERWELL.
THE ELFIN KNIGHT.
Reprinted from _A Collection of Curious Old Ballads and Miscellaneous Poetry_, Edinburgh. David Webster, 1824.
Other versions are given in Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, (see the Appendix to this volume;) Kinloch's _Ancient Scottish Ballads_, (p.
145;) Buchan's _Ancient Ballads_, (ii. 296.) Similar collections of impossibilities in _The Trooper and Fair Maid_, Buchan, i. 230; _Robin's Tesment_, _id._, i. 273, or Aytoun, 2d ed. ii.
197; _As I was walking under a grove_, _Pills to purge Melancholy_, v.
370. See also _post_, vol. ii. 224, 352, vol. iv. 132, 287; and in German, _Von eitel unmoeglichen Dingen_, Erk's _Liederhort_, p. 334-37;
Uhland, _Eitle Dinge_, No. 4, A, B; _Wunderhorn_, ii. 410.
The Elfin knight sits on yon hill, _Ba, ba, ba, lillie ba._ He blaws his horn baith loud and shrill.
_The wind hath blawn my plaid awa._ He blaws it east, he blaws it west, He blaws it where he liketh best.
"I wish that horn were in my kist, 5 Yea, and the knight in my arms niest."
She had no sooner these words said, Than the knight came to her bed.
"Thou art o'er young a maid," quoth he, "Married with me, that thou would'st be." 10 "I have a sister, younger than I, And she was married yesterday."
"Married with me if thou would'st be, A curtisie thou must do to me.
"It's ye maun mak a sark to me, 15 Without any cut or seam," quoth he;
"And ye maun shape it, knife-, sheerless, And also sew it needle-, threedless."
"If that piece of courtisie I do to thee, Another thou must do to me. 20 "I have an aiker of good ley land, Which lyeth low by yon sea strand;
"It's ye maun till't wi' your touting horn, And ye maun saw't wi' the pepper corn;
"And ye maun harrow't wi' a thorn, 25 And hae your wark done ere the morn;
"And ye maun shear it wi' your knife, And no lose a stack o't for your life;
"And ye maun stack it in a mouse hole, And ye maun thrash it in your shoe sole; 30 "And ye maun dight it in your loof, And also sack it in your glove;
"And ye maun bring it over the sea,[L33] Fair, and clean, and dry to me;
"And when that ye have done your wark, 35 Come back to me, and ye'll get your sark."
"I'll not quite my plaid for my life;
It haps my seven bairnes and my wife."
"My maidenhead I'll then keep still, Let the Elfin knight do what he will. 40 "My plaid awa, my plaid away, And owre the hills and far awa, And far awa to Norowa', My plaid shall not be blawn awa."
33, thou must.
THE BROOMFIELD HILL.
A fragment of this ballad was printed in Herd's Collection, ("_I'll wager, I'll wager_," i. 226.) The present version is from the _Border Minstrelsy_, (iii. 28,) and we have added another from Kinloch's _Ancient Scottish Ballads_. A somewhat longer copy is given in Buchan's _Ballads_, (ii. 291,) and a modernized English one, of no value, (_The West Country Wager_,) in _Ancient Poems_, &c., Percy Society, vol. xvii. p. 116.
_Brume, brume on hil_, is mentioned in the _Complaynt of Scotland_, and formed part of Captain Cox's well-known collection.
A Danish ballad exhibits the same theme, though differently treated:
_Soevnerunerne_, Grundtvig, No. 81.
There was a knight and a lady bright, Had a true tryst at the broom;
The ane ga'ed early in the morning, The other in the afternoon.
And aye she sat in her mother's bower door, 5 And aye she made her mane, "O whether should I gang to the Broomfield hill, Or should I stay at hame?
"For if I gang to the Broomfield hill, My maidenhead is gone; 10 And if I chance to stay at hame, My love will ca' me mansworn."-- Up then spake a witch woman, Aye from the room aboon;
"O, ye may gang to Broomfield hill, 15 And yet come maiden hame.
"For when ye come to the Broomfield hill, Ye'll find your love asleep, With a silver belt about his head, And a broom-cow at his feet. 20 "Take ye the blossom of the broom, The blossom it smells sweet, And strew it at your true love's head, And likewise at his feet.
"Take ye the rings off your fingers, 25 Put them on his right hand, To let him know, when he doth awake, His love was at his command."-- She pu'd the broom flower on Hive-hill, And strew'd on's white hals bane, 30 And that was to be wittering true, That maiden she had gane.
"O where were ye, my milk-white steed, That I hae coft sae dear, That wadna watch and waken me, 35 When there was maiden here?"-- "I stamped wi' my foot, master, And gar'd my bridle ring;
But nae kin' thing wald waken ye, Till she was past and gane."-- 40 "And wae betide ye, my gay goss hawk, That I did love sae dear, That wadna watch and waken me, When there was maiden here."-- "I clapped wi' my wings, master, 45 And aye my bells I rang, And aye cry'd, Waken, waken, master, Before the ladye gang."-- "But haste and haste, my gude white steed, To come the maiden till, 50 Or a' the birds of gude green wood Of your flesh shall have their fill."-- "Ye needna burst your gude white steed, Wi' racing o'er the howm;
Nae bird flies faster through the wood, 55 Than she fled through the broom."
LORD JOHN.
From Kinloch's _Ancient Scottish Ballads_, (p. 195.) "I'll wager, I'll wager," says Lord John, "A hundred merks and ten, That ye winna gae to the bonnie broom-fields, And a maid return again."-- "But I'll lay a wager wi' you, Lord John, 5 A' your merks oure again, That I'll gae alane to the bonnie broom-fields, And a maid return again."
Then Lord John mounted his grey steed, And his hound wi' his bells sae bricht, 10 And swiftly he rade to the bonny broom-fields, Wi' his hawks, like a lord or knicht.
"Now rest, now rest, my bonnie grey steed, My lady will soon be here;
And I'll lay my head aneath this rose sae red, 15 And the bonnie burn sae near."
But sound, sound, was the sleep he took, For he slept till it was noon;
And his lady cam at day, left a taiken and away, Gaed as licht as a glint o' the moon. 20 She strawed the roses on the ground, Threw her mantle on the brier, And the belt around her middle sae jimp, As a taiken that she'd been there.
The rustling leaves flew round his head, 25 And rous'd him frae his dream;
He saw by the roses, and mantle sae green, That his love had been there and was gane.
"O whare was ye, my gude grey steed, That I coft ye sae dear; 30 That ye didna waken your master, Whan ye ken'd that his love was here."-- "I pautit wi' my foot, master, Garr'd a' my bridles ring;
And still I cried, Waken, gude master, 35 For now is the hour and time."-- "Then whare was ye, my bonnie grey hound, That I coft ye sae dear, That ye didna waken your master, Whan ye kend that his love was here."-- 40 "I pautit wi' my foot, master, Garr'd a' my bells to ring;
And still I cried, Waken, gude master, For now is the hour and time."-- "But whare was ye, my hawks, my hawks, 45 That I coft ye sae dear, That ye didna waken your master, Whan ye ken'd that his love was here."-- "O wyte na me, now, my master dear, I garr'd a' my young hawks sing, 50 And still I cried, Waken, gude master, For now is the hour and time."-- "Then be it sae, my wager gane!
'T will skaith frae meikle ill;
For gif I had found her in bonnie broom-fields, 55 O' her heart's blude ye'd drunken your fill."
* * * * * The stanzas below are from an American version of this ballad called _The Green Broomfield_, printed in a cheap song-book. (Graham's _Illustrated Magazine_, Sept. 1858.) "Then when she went to the green broom field, Where her love was fast asleep, With a gray _goose_-hawk and a green laurel bough, And a green broom under his feet.
"And when he awoke from out his sleep, An angry man was he;
He looked to the East, and he looked to the West, And he wept for his sweetheart to see.
"Oh! where was you, my gray _goose_-hawk, The hawk that I loved so dear, That you did not awake me from out my sleep, When my sweetheart was so near!"
KEMPION.
This ballad was first printed in the _Border Minstrelsy_, (vol. iii.
p. 230,) "chiefly from Mrs. Brown's MS. with corrections from a recited fragment." Motherwell furnishes a different version, from recitation, (_Minstrelsy_, p. 374,) which is subjoined to the present, and the well-known ditty of the _Laidley Worm of Spindleston-Heugh_, upon the same theme, will be found in the Appendix to this volume.
"Such transformations as the song narrates," remarks Sir Walter Scott, "are common in the annals of chivalry. In the 25th and 26th cantos of the second book of the _Orlando Inamorato_, the Paladin, Brandimarte, after surmounting many obstacles, penetrates into the recesses of an enchanted palace. Here he finds a fair damsel, seated upon a tomb, who announces to him, that, in order to achieve her deliverance, he must raise the lid of the sepulchre, and kiss whatever being should issue forth. The knight, having pledged his faith, proceeds to open the tomb, out of which a monstrous snake issues forth, with a tremendous hiss. Brandimarte, with much reluctance, fulfils the _bizarre_ conditions of the adventure; and the monster is instantly changed into a beautiful Fairy, who loads her deliverer with benefits."
_Jomfruen i Ormeham_, in Grundtvig's _Danmarks Gamle Folkeviser_, ii.
177, is essentially the same ballad as _Kempion_. The characteristic incident of the story (a maiden who has been transformed by her step-mother into a snake or other monster, being restored to her proper shape by the kiss of a knight) is as common in the popular fiction of the North as Scott asserts it to be in chivalrous romance.
For instances, see Grundtvig, l. l., and under the closely related _Lindormen_, ii. 211.
The name _Kempion_ is itself a monument of the relation of our ballads to the _Kaempeviser_. Pollard of Pollard Hall, who slew "a venomous serpent which did much harm to man and beast," is called in the modern legend a _Champion_ Knight.
"Cum heir, cum heir, ye freely feed, And lay your head low on my knee;
The heaviest weird I will you read, That ever was read to gay ladye.
"O meikle dolour sall ye dree, 5 And aye the salt seas o'er ye'se swim;
And far mair dolour sall ye dree On Estmere crags[L8], when ye them climb.
"I weird ye to a fiery beast, And relieved sall ye never be, 10 Till Kempion, the kingis son, Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss thee."-- O meikle dolour did she dree, And aye the salt seas o'er she swam;
And far mair dolour did she dree 15 On Estmere crag, when she them clamb.
And aye she cried for Kempion, Gin he would but come to her hand:
Now word has gane to Kempion, That sicken a beast was in his land. 20 "Now, by my sooth," said Kempion, "This fiery beast I'll gang and see."-- "And by my sooth," said Segramour, "My ae brother, I'll gang wi' thee."
Then bigged hae they a bonny boat, 25 And they hae set her to the sea;
But a mile before they reach'd the shore, Around them she gar'd the red fire flee.
"O Segramour, keep the boat afloat, And let her na the land o'er near; 30 For this wicked beast will sure gae mad, And set fire to a' the land and mair."-- Syne has he bent an arblast bow, And aim'd an arrow at her head;
And swore if she didna quit the land, 35 Wi' that same shaft to shoot her dead.
"O out of my stythe I winna rise, (And it is not for the awe o' thee,) Till Kempion, the kingis son, Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss me."-- 40 He has louted him o'er the dizzy crag, And gien the monster kisses ane;
Awa she gaed, and again she cam.
The fieryest beast that ever was seen.
"O out o' my stythe I winna rise, 45 (And not for a' thy bow nor thee,) Till Kempion, the kingis son, Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss me."-- He's louted him o'er the Estmere crags, And he has gi'en her kisses twa: 50 Awa she gaed, and again she cam, The fieryest beast that ever you saw.
"O out of my den I winna rise, Nor flee it for the fear o' thee, Till Kempion, that courteous knight, 55 Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss me."-- He's louted him o'er the lofty crag, And he has gi'en her kisses three:
Awa she gaed, and again she cam, The loveliest ladye e'er could be! 60 "And by my sooth," says Kempion, "My ain true love, (for this is she,) They surely had a heart o' stane, Could put thee to such misery.
"O was it warwolf in the wood? 65 Or was it mermaid in the sea?
Or was it man or vile woman, My ain true love, that mis-shaped thee?"-- "It wasna warwolf in the wood, Nor was it mermaid in the sea: 70 But it was my wicked step-mother, And wae and weary may she be!"-- "O, a heavier weird shall light her on, Than ever fell on vile woman;
Her hair shall grow rough, and her teeth grow lang, 75 And on her four feet shall she gang.
"None shall take pity her upon;
In Wormeswood she aye shall won;
And relieved shall she never be, Till St. Mungo come over the sea."-- 80 And sighing said that weary wight, "I doubt that day I'll never see!"
8. If by Estmere Crags we are to understand the rocky cliffs of Northumberland, in opposition to Westmoreland, we may bring our scene of action near Bamborough, and thereby almost identify the tale of _Kempion_ with that of the _Laidley Worm of Spindleston_, to which it bears so strong a resemblance.--SCOTT.
But why should we seek to do this?
KEMP OWYNE.
Kemp Owyne, says Motherwell, "was, no doubt, the same Ewein or Owain, ap Urien the king of Reged, who is celebrated by the bards, Taliessin and Llywarch-Hen, as well as in the Welsh historical Triads. In a poem of Gruffyd Llwyd, A.D. 1400, addressed to Owain Glyndwr, is the following allusion to this warrior. 'Thou hast travelled by land and by sea in the conduct of thine affairs, like Owain ap Urien in days of yore, when with activity he encountered the black knight of the water.'[C] His mistress had a ring esteemed one of the thirteen rarities of Britain, which, (like the wondrous ring of Gyges) would render the wearer invisible." _Minstrelsy_, p. lxxxiii.
[C] "On sea, on land, thou still didst brave The dangerous cliff and rapid wave;
Like _Urien_, who subdued the knight, And the fell dragon put to flight, Yon moss-grown fount beside;
The grim, black warrior of the flood, The dragon, gorged with human blood, The waters' scaly pride."
Jones's _Welsh Bards_, i. 41.
The copy of Kemp Owyne printed in Buchan's _Ancient Ballads_, (ii.
78,) is the same as the following.
Her mother died when she was young, Which gave her cause to make great moan;
Her father married the warst woman That ever lived in Christendom.
She served her with foot and hand, 5 In every thing that she could dee;
Till once, in an unlucky time, She threw her in ower Craigy's sea.
Says, "Lie you there, dove Isabel, And all my sorrows lie with thee; 10 Till Kemp Owyne come ower the sea, And borrow you with kisses three, Let all the warld do what they will, Oh borrowed shall you never be."
Her breath grew strang, her hair grew lang, 15 And twisted thrice about the tree, And all the people, far and near, Thought that a savage beast was she;
This news did come to Kemp Owyne, Where he lived far beyond the sea. 20 He hasted him to Craigy's sea, And on the savage beast look'd he;
Her breath was strang, her hair was lang, And twisted was about the tree, And with a swing she came about: 25 "Come to Craigy's sea, and kiss with me.
"Here is a royal belt," she cried, "That I have found in the green sea;
And while your body it is on, Drawn shall your blood never be; 30 But if you touch me, tail or fin, I vow my belt your death shall be."
He stepped in, gave her a kiss, The royal belt he brought him wi';
Her breath was strang, her hair was lang, 35 And twisted twice about the tree, And with a swing she came about:
"Come to Craigy's sea, and kiss with me.
"Here is a royal ring," she said, "That I have found in the green sea; 40 And while your finger it is on, Drawn shall your blood never be;
But if you touch me, tail or fin, I swear my ring your death shall be."
He stepped in, gave her a kiss, 45 The royal ring he brought him wi';
Her breath was strang, her hair was lang, And twisted ance around the tree, And with a swing she came about:
"Come to Craigy's sea, and kiss with me. 50 "Here is a royal brand," she said, "That I have found in the green sea;
And while your body it is on, Drawn shall your blood never be;
But if you touch me, tail or fin, 55 I swear my brand your death shall be."
He stepped in, gave her a kiss, The royal brand he brought him wi';
Her breath was sweet, her hair grew short, And twisted nane about the tree; 60 And smilingly she came about, As fair a woman as fair could be.
KING HENRY.
A modernized copy of King Henry was published in the _Tales of Wonder_, (No 57,) under the title of _Courteous King Jamie_. It first appeared in an ancient dress in the _Border Minstrelsy_, (iii. 274,) but a version preferable in some respects was given by Jamieson in his _Popular Ballads_, (ii. 194,) which is here printed, without the editor's interpolations. For a notice of similar legends, see the _Marriage of Sir Gawaine_, at page 28 of this volume.
Lat never a man a wooing wend, That lacketh thingis three;
A routh o' gould, an open heart, Ay fu' o' charity.
As this I speak of King Henry, 5 For he lay burd-alane;
And he's doen him to a jelly hunt's ha', Was far frae ony town.
He chas'd the deer now him before, And the roe down by the den, 10 Till the fattest buck in a' the flock King Henry he has slain.
O he has doen him to his ha', To mak him bierly cheer;
And in it cam a grisly ghost, 15 Staed stappin' i' the fleer.
Her head hat the roof-tree o' the house, Her middle ye mat weel span;-- He's thrown to her his gay mantle;
Says,--"Ladie, hap your lingcan." 20 Her teeth was a' like leather stakes, Her nose like club or mell;
And I ken nae thing she 'pear'd to be, But the fiend that wons in hell.
"Some meat, some meat, ye King Henry; 25 Some meat ye gie to me."
"And what meat's in this house, Ladie?
And what ha'e I to gi'e?"
"Its ye do kill your berry-brown steed, And ye bring him here to me." 30 O whan he slew his berry-brown steed, Wow but his heart was sair!
She ate him a' up, flesh and bane, Left naething but hide and hair.
"Mair meat, mair meat, ye King Henry, 35 Mair meat ye bring to me."
"And what meat's in this house, Ladie?
And what hae I to gi'e?"
"O ye do kill your good grey hounds, And ye bring them in to me." 40 O whan he killed his good grey hounds, Wow but his heart was sair!
She ate them a' up, flesh and bane, Left naething but hide and hair.
"Mair meat, mair meat, ye King Henry, 45 Mair meat ye bring to me."
"And what meat's in this house, Ladie?
And what hae I to gi'e?"
"O ye do kill your gay goss hawks, And ye bring them here to me." 50 O whan he kill'd his gay goss hawks, Wow but his heart was sair!
She ate them a' up, skin and bane, Left naething but feathers bare.
"Some drink, some drink, now, King Henry; 55 Some drink ye bring to me."
"O what drink's in this house, Ladie, That ye're nae welcome tee?"
"O ye sew up your horse's hide, And bring in a drink to me." 60 And he's sew'd up the bloody hide, A puncheon o' wine put in;
She drank it a' up at a waught, Left na ae drap ahin'.
"A bed, a bed, now, King Henry, 65 A bed ye mak to me;
For ye maun pu' the heather green, And mak a bed to me."
And pu'd has he the heather green, And made to her a bed; 70 And up he's ta'en his gay mantle, And o'er it has he spread.
"Tak aff your claiths, now, King Henry, And lye down by my side;"
"O God forbid," says King Henry, 75 "That ever the like betide;
That ever the fiend that wons in hell, Should streek down by my side."
* * * * * Whan nicht was gane, and day was come, And the sun shone thro' the ha', 80 The fairest lady that ever was seen Lay atween him and the wa'.
"O weel is me!" says King Henry;
"How lang'll this last wi' me?"
Then out it spake that fair lady,-- 85 "E'en till the day you die.
"For I've met wi' mony a gentle knicht, That gae me sic a fill;
But never before wi' a curteis knicht, That gae me a' my will." 90 COSPATRICK.
(_Border Minstrelsy_, iii. 263.) This ballad, which is still very popular, is known under various other names, as _Bothwell_, _Child Brenton_, _Lord Dingwall_, _We were Sisters_, _We were Seven_, &c. Scott's version was derived principally from recitation, but some of the concluding stanzas were taken from Herd's. Herd's copy, which must be regarded as a fragment, is given in connection with the present, and Buchan's in the Appendix to this volume. Another edition, of a suspicious character, may be seen in Cromek's _Remains of Nithsdale and Galloway Song_, (p. 205.) All the principal incidents of the story are found in _Ingefred og Gudrune, Danske Viser_, No. 194, translated by Jamieson, _Illustrations_ p. 340.
More or less imperfect versions of the same are _Riddar Olle, Svenska Folk-Visor_, ii. p. 217, 59, 56, 215, and _Herr Aester och Froeken Sissa_, p. 50. The substitution of the maid-servant for the bride, occurs also in _Torkild Trundesoen, Danske V._, No. 200, or _Thorkil Troneson_, Arwidsson, No. 36. This idea was perhaps derived from _Tristan and Isold_: see Scott's _Sir Tristrem_, II. 54, 55.
Cospatrick has sent o'er the faem;
Cospatrick brought his ladye hame;
And fourscore ships have come her wi', The ladye by the grene-wood tree.
There were twal' and twal' wi' baken bread, 5 And twal' and twal' wi' gowd sae reid, And twal' and twal' wi' bouted flour, And twal' and twal' wi' the paramour.
Sweet Willy was a widow's son, And at her stirrup he did run; 10 And she was clad in the finest pall, But aye she let the tears down fall.
"O is your saddle set awrye?
Or rides your steed for you ower high?
Or are you mourning, in your tide, 15 That you suld be Cospatrick's bride?"
"I am not mourning, at this tide, That I suld be Cospatrick's bride;
But I am sorrowing in my mood, That I suld leave my mother good. 20 "But, gentle boy, come tell to me, What is the custom of thy countrie?"-- "The custom thereof, my dame," he says, "Will ill a gentle laydye please.
"Seven king's daughters has our lord wedded, 25 And seven king's daughters has our lord bedded;
But he's cutted their breasts frae their breast-bane, And sent them mourning hame again.
"Yet, gin you're sure that you're a maid, Ye may gae safely to his bed; 30 But gif o' that ye be na sure, Then hire some damsell o' your bour."-- The ladye's call'd her bour maiden, That waiting was into her train;
"Five thousand merks I'll gie to thee, 35 To sleep this night with my lord for me."-- When bells were rang, and mass was sayne, And a' men unto bed were gane, Cospatrick and the bonny maid, Into a chamber they were laid. 40 "Now, speak to me, blankets, and speak to me, bed, And speak, thou sheet, enchanted web;
And speak up, my bonny brown sword, that winna lie, Is this a true maiden that lies by me?"-- "It is not a maid that you hae wedded, 45 But it is a maid that you hae bedded;
It is a leal maiden that lies by thee, But not the maiden that it should be."-- O wrathfully he left the bed, And wrathfully his claes on did; 50 And he has ta'en him through the ha', And on his mother he did ca'.
"I am the most unhappy man, That ever was in Christen land!
I courted a maiden, meik and mild, 55 And I hae gotten naething but a woman wi' child."-- "O stay, my son, into this ha', And sport ye wi' your merry men a';
And I will to the secret bour, To see how it fares wi' your paramour."-- 60 The carline she was stark and sture, She aff the hinges dang the dure;
"O is your bairn to laird or loun, Or is it to your father's groom?"-- "O hear me, mother, on my knee, 65 Till my sad story I tell to thee:
O we were sisters, sisters seven, We were the fairest under heaven.
"It fell on a summer's afternoon, When a' our toilsome task was done, 70 We cast the kevils us amang, To see which suld to the grene-wood gang.
"Ohon! alas, for I was youngest, And aye my wierd it was the hardest!
The kevil it on me did fa', 75 Whilk was the cause of a' my woe.
"For to the grene-wood I maun gae, To pu' the red rose and the slae;
To pu' the red rose and the thyme, To deck my mother's bour and mine. 80 "I hadna pu'd a flower but ane, When by there came a gallant hende, Wi' high-coll'd hose and laigh-coll'd shoon, And he seem'd to be sum kingis son.
"And be I a maid, or be I nae, 85 He kept me there till the close o' day;
And be I a maid, or be I nane, He kept me there till the day was done.
"He gae me a lock o' his yellow hair, And bade me keep it ever mair; 90 He gae me a carknet o' bonny beads, And bade me keep it against my needs.
"He gae to me a gay gold ring, And bade me keep it abune a' thing."-- "What did ye wi' the tokens rare, 95 That ye gat frae that gallant there?"-- "O bring that coffer unto me, And a' the tokens ye sall see."-- "Now stay, daughter, your bour within, While I gae parley wi' my son."-- 100 O she has ta'en her thro' the ha', And on her son began to ca';
"What did ye wi' the bonny beads I bade you keep against your needs?
"What did you wi' the gay gold ring 105 I bade you keep abune a' thing?"-- "I gae them to a ladye gay, I met on grene-wood on a day.
"But I wad gie a' my halls and tours, I had that ladye within my bours; 110 But I wad gie my very life, I had that ladye to my wife."-- "Now keep, my son, your ha's and tours, Ye have the bright burd in your bours;
And keep, my son, your very life, 115 Ye have that ladye to your wife."-- Now, or a month was come and gane, The ladye bare a bonny son;
And 'twas weel written on his breast-bane, "Cospatrick[L120] is my father's name." 120 "O row my lady in satin and silk, And wash my son in the morning milk."
120, Cospatrick, _Comes Patricius_, was the designation of the Earl of Dunbar, in the days of Wallace and Bruce.--SCOTT.
BOTHWELL.
From Herd's _Scottish Songs_, (i. 143.) As Bothwell was walking in the lowlands alane, _Hey down, and a down_, He met six ladies sae gallant and fine, _Hey down, and a down._ He cast his lot amang them a', 5 And on the youngest his lot did fa'.
He's brought her frae her mother's bower, Unto his strongest castle and tower.
But ay she cry'd and made great moan, And ay the tear came trickling down. 10 "Come up, come up," said the foremost man, "I think our bride comes slowly on."
"O lady, sits your saddle awry, Or is your steed for you owre high?"
"My saddle is not set awry, 15 Nor carries me my steed owre high;
"But I am weary of my life, Since I maun be Lord Bothwell's wife."
He's blawn his horn sae sharp and shrill, Up start the deer on every hill; 20 He's blawn his horn sae lang and loud, Up start the deer in gude green wood.
His lady mother lookit owre the castle wa', And she saw them riding ane and a'.
She's called upon her maids by seven, 25 To mak his bed baith saft and even:
She's called upon her cooks by nine, To make their dinner fair and fine.
When day was gane and night was come, "What ails my love on me to frown? 30 "Or does the wind blow in your glove, Or runs your mind on another love?"
"Nor blows the wind within my glove, Nor runs my mind on another love;"
"But I not maid nor maiden am, 35 For I'm wi' bairn to another man."
"I thought I'd a maiden sae meek and sae mild, But I've nought but a woman wi' child."
His mother's taen her up to a tower, And lockit her in her secret bower: 40 "Now doughter mine, come tell to me, Wha's bairn this is that you are wi'."
"O mother dear, I canna learn Wha is the father of my bairn.
"But as I walk'd in the lowlands my lane, 45 I met a gentleman gallant and fine;
"He keepit me there sae late and sae lang, Frae the ev'ning late till the morning dawn;
"And a' that he gied me to my propine, Was a pair of green gloves, and a gay gold ring, 50 "Three lauchters of his yellow hair, In case that we shou'd meet nae mair."
His lady mother went down the stair:
"Now son, now son, come tell to me, Where's the green gloves I gave to thee?" 55 "I gied to a lady sae fair and so fine, The green gloves and a gay gold ring:
"But I wad gie my castles and towers, I had that lady within my bowers:
"But I wad gie my very life, 60 I had that lady to be my wife."
"Now keep, now keep your castles and towers, You have that lady within your bowers:
"Now keep, now keep your very life, You have that lady to be your wife." 65 "O row my lady in sattin and silk, And wash my son in the morning milk."
WILLIE'S LADYE.
Printed from Mrs. Brown's MS., in the _Border Minstrelsy_, vol. iii.
p. 170. Another copy is given in Jamieson's _Popular Ballads_, (ii.
367,) and versions, enlarged and altered from the ancient, in the same work, (ii. 179,) and in _Tales of Wonder_, No. 56. This ballad bears a striking resemblance to _Sir Stig and Lady Torelild_, translated from the Danish by Jamieson, _Illustrations of Northern Antiquities_, p. 344. This is the eighth (marked H) of nine Danish ballads given by Grundtvig, under the title _Hustru og Mands Moder_, vol. ii. 404.
Three Swedish versions have been printed: two in Arwidsson's _Fornsanger, Liten Kerstins Foertrollning_, ii. 252, and another (Grundtvig) in Cavallius and Stephens's _Svenska Folksagor_.
"Those who wish to know how an incantation, or charm, of the distressing nature here described, was performed in classic days, may consult the story of Galanthis's Metamorphosis, in Ovid, or the following passage in Apuleius: 'Eadem (saga, scilicet, quaedam) amatoris uxorem, quod in eam dicacule probrum dixerat, jam in sarcinam praegnationis, obsepto utero, et repigrato f[oe]tu, perpetua praegnatione damnavit. Et ut cuncti numerant, octo annorum onere, misella illa, velut elephantum paritura, distenditur.' APUL. _Metam._ lib. i.
"There is a curious tale about a Count of Westeravia, whom a deserted concubine bewitched upon his marriage, so as to preclude all hopes of his becoming a father. The spell continued to operate for three years, till one day, the Count happening to meet with his former mistress, she maliciously asked him about the increase of his family. The Count, conceiving some suspicion from her manner, craftily answered, that God had blessed him with three fine children; on which she exclaimed, like Willie's mother in the ballad, "May heaven confound the old hag, by whose counsel I threw an enchanted pitcher into the draw-well of your palace!" The spell being found, and destroyed, the Count became the father of a numerous family. _Hierarchie of the Blessed Angels_, p.
474." SCOTT.
Willie's ta'en him o'er the faem, He's wooed a wife, and brought her hame;
He's wooed her for her yellow hair, But his mother wrought her meikle care;
And meikle dolour gar'd her dree, 5 For lighter she can never be;
But in her bower she sits wi' pain, And Willie mourns o'er her in vain.
And to his mother he has gane, That vile rank witch, o' vilest kind! 10 He says--"My ladie has a cup, Wi' gowd and silver set about;
This gudely gift sall be your ain, And let her be lighter o' her young bairn."-- "Of her young bairn she's never be lighter, 15 Nor in her bour to shine the brighter:
But she sall die, and turn to clay, And you sall wed another may."-- "Another may I'll never wed, Another may I'll never bring hame:"-- 20 But, sighing, said that weary wight-- "I wish my life were at an end!
"Yet gae ye to your mother again, That vile rank witch, o' vilest kind!
And say, your ladye has a steed, 25 The like o' him's no in the land o' Leed.
"For he is silver shod before, And he is gowden shod behind;
At every tuft of that horse mane, There's a golden chess, and a bell to ring. 30 This gudely gift sall be her ain, And let me be lighter o' my young bairn."-- "Of her young bairn she's ne'er be lighter, Nor in her bour to shine the brighter;
But she sall die, and turn to clay, 35 And ye sall wed another may."-- "Another may I'll never wed, Another may I'll never bring hame:"-- But, sighing, said that weary wight-- "I wish my life were at an end!-- 40 "Yet gae ye to your mother again, That vile rank witch, o' rankest kind!
And say your ladye has a girdle, It's a' red gowd to the middle;
"And aye, at ilka siller hem 45 Hang fifty siller bells and ten;
This gudely gift sall be her ain, And let me be lighter o' my young bairn."-- "Of her young bairn she's ne'er be lighter, Nor in your bour to shine the brighter; 50 For she sall die, and turn to clay, And thou sall wed another may."-- "Another may I'll never wed, Another may I'll never bring hame;"-- But, sighing, said that weary wight-- 55 "I wish my days were at an end!"-- Then out and spak the Billy Blind,[L57] (He spak aye in good time:) "Yet gae ye to the market-place, And there do buy a loaf of wace; 60 Do shape it bairn and bairnly like, And in it twa glassen een you'll put;
"And bid her your boy's christening to, Then notice weel what she shall do;
And do you stand a little away, 65 To notice weel what she may say."
[L67]He did him to the market-place, And there he bought a loaf[L68] o' wax;
He shaped it bairn and bairnly like, And in twa glazen een he pat; 70 He did him till his mither then, And bade her to his boy's christnin;
And he did stand a little forbye, And noticed well what she did say.
"O wha has loosed the nine witch knots, 75 That were amang that ladye's locks?
And wha's ta'en out the kaims o' care, That were amang that ladye's hair?
"And wha has ta'en down that bush o' woodbine, That hung between her bour and mine? 80 And wha has kill'd the master kid,[L81] That ran beneath that ladye's bed?
And wha has loosed her left foot shee, And let that ladye lighter be?"
Syne, Willy's loosed the nine witch knots, 85 That were amang that ladye's locks;
And Willie's ta'en out the kaims o' care, That were into that ladye's hair;
And he's ta'en down the bush o' woodbine, Hung atween her bour and the witch carline; 90 And he has kill'd the master kid, That ran beneath that ladye's bed;
And he has loosed her left foot shee, And latten that ladye lighter be;
And now he has gotten a bonny son, 95 And meikle grace be him upon.
57. _Billy Blind_--A familiar genius, or propitious spirit, somewhat similar to the _Brownie_.
67-74. Inserted from Jamieson's copy.
68. _leaf_, Jamieson.
81. The witch's chief familiar, placed in the chamber of the sick woman in the form of a kid.
ALISON GROSS.
Jamieson's _Popular Ballads_, ii. 187.
FROM THE RECITATION OF MRS. BROWN.
The beginning is to be compared with _Lindormen_, the whole ballad with _Jomfruen i Ormeham_, Grundtvig's _Folkeviser_, ii. 213, 177.
O Alison Gross, that lives in yon tower, The ugliest witch in the north countrie, Has trysted me ae day up till her bower, And mony fair speech she made to me.
She straiked my head, and she kembed my hair, 5 And she set me down saftly on her knee, Says,--"Gin ye will be my lemman sae true, Sae mony braw things as I would you gi'e."
She shaw'd me a mantle o' red scarlet, Wi' gouden flowers and fringes fine, 10 Says "Gin ye will be my lemman sae true, This goodly gift it sall be thine."
"Awa, awa, ye ugly witch, Haud far awa, and lat me be;
I never will be your lemman sae true, 15 And I wish I were out of your company."
She neist brocht a sark o' the saftest silk, Weel wrought wi' pearls about the band;
Says,--"Gin ye will be my ain true love, This goodly gift ye sall command." 20 She shaw'd me a cup o' the good red goud, Weel set wi' jewels sae fair to see;
Says,--"Gin ye will be my lemman sae true, This goodly gift I will you gie."
"Awa, awa, ye ugly witch! 25 Haud far awa, and lat me be;
For I wadna ance kiss your ugly mouth For a' the gifts that ye cou'd gie."
She's turned her richt and round about, And thrice she blew on a grass-green horn; 30 And she sware by the moon and the stars aboon, That she'd gar me rue the day I was born.
Then out has she ta'en a silver wand, And she's turned her three times round and round;
She's mutter'd sic words, that my strength it fail'd, 35 And I fell down senseless on the ground.
She's turn'd me into an ugly worm, And gar'd me toddle about the tree;
And ay, on ilka Saturday's night, My sister Maisry came to me, 40 Wi' silver bason, and silver kemb, To kemb my headie upon her knee;
But or I had kiss'd her ugly mouth, I'd rather hae toddled about the tree.
But as it fell out on last Hallowe'en, 45 When the Seely Court[L46] was ridin' by, The queen lighted down on a gowan bank, Nae far frae the tree whare I wont to lye.
She took me up in her milk-white hand, And she straiked me three times o'er her knee; 50 She changed me again to my ain proper shape, And I nae mair maun toddle about the tree.
46. _Seely Court_, i.e. "pleasant or happy court," or "court of the pleasant and happy people." This agrees with the ancient and more legitimate idea of Fairies. JAMIESON. See p. 120, v. 131, _et seq._ THE EARL OF MAR'S DAUGHTER.
From Buchan's _Ancient Ballads and Songs of the North of Scotland_, (i. 49.) It is much to be regretted that this piece has not come down to us in a purer and more ancient form. Similar ballads are found in Danish, Swedish, and Faroish. Several forms of the Danish are given by Grundtvig (_Ridderen i Fugleham_, No. 68), who also cites many popular tales which have the same basis, e.g. the Countess d'Aulnoy's fairy story of _The Blue Bird_.
It was intill a pleasant time, Upon a simmer's day;
The noble Earl of Mar's daughter Went forth to sport and play.
As thus she did amuse hersell, 5 Below a green aik tree, There she saw a sprightly doo Set on a tower sae hie.
"O Cow-me-doo, my love sae true, If ye'll come down to me, 10 Ye'se hae a cage o' guid red gowd Instead o' simple tree:
"I'll put gowd hingers roun' your cage, And siller roun' your wa';
I'll gar ye shine as fair a bird 15 As ony o' them a'."
But she had nae these words well spoke, Nor yet these words well said, Till Cow-me-doo flew frae the tower, And lighted on her head. 20 Then she has brought this pretty bird Hame to her bowers and ha';
And made him shine as fair a bird As ony o' them a'.
When day was gane, and night was come, 25 About the evening tide, This lady spied a sprightly youth Stand straight up by her side.
"From whence came ye, young man?" she said, "That does surprise me sair; 30 My door was bolted right secure;
What way ha'e ye come here?"
"O had your tongue, ye lady fair, Lat a' your folly be;
Mind ye not on your turtle doo 35 Last day ye brought wi' thee?"
"O tell me mair, young man," she said, "This does surprise me now;
What country ha'e ye come frae?
What pedigree are you?" 40 "My mither lives on foreign isles, She has nae mair but me;
She is a queen o' wealth and state, And birth and high degree;
"Likewise well skill'd in magic spells, 45 As ye may plainly see;
And she transform'd me to yon shape, To charm such maids as thee.
"I am a doo the live lang day, A sprightly youth at night; 50 This aye gars me appear mair fair In a fair maiden's sight.
"And it was but this verra day That I came ower the sea;
Your lovely face did me enchant,-- 55 I'll live and dee wi' thee."
"O Cow-me-doo, my luve sae true, Nae mair frae me ye'se gae."
"That's never my intent, my luve, As ye said, it shall be sae." 60 "O Cow-me-doo, my luve sae true, It's time to gae to bed."
"Wi' a' my heart, my dear marrow, It's be as ye ha'e said."
Then he has staid in bower wi' her 65 For sax lang years and ane, Till sax young sons to him she bare, And the seventh she's brought hame.
But aye as ever a child was born, He carried them away, 70 And brought them to his mither's care, As fast as he cou'd fly.
Thus he has staid in bower wi' her For twenty years and three;
There came a lord o' high renown 75 To court this fair ladie.
But still his proffer she refused, And a' his presents too;
Says, "I'm content to live alane Wi' my bird, Cow-me-doo." 80 Her father sware a solemn oath Amang the nobles all, "The morn, or ere I eat or drink, This bird I will gar kill."
The bird was sitting in his cage, 85 And heard what they did say;
And when he found they were dismist, Says, "Waes me for this day!
"Before that I do langer stay, And thus to be forlorn, 90 I'll gang unto my mither's bower, Where I was bred and born."
Then Cow-me-doo took flight and flew Beyond the raging sea;
And lighted near his mither's castle 95 On a tower o' gowd sae hie.
As his mither was wauking out, To see what she coud see, And there she saw her little son Set on the tower sae hie. 100 "Get dancer here to dance," she said, "And minstrells for to play;
For here's my young son, Florentine, Come here wi' me to stay."
"Get nae dancers to dance, mither, 105 Nor minstrells for to play;
For the mither o' my seven sons, The morn's her wedding-day."
"O tell me, tell me, Florentine, Tell me, and tell me true, 110 Tell me this day without a flaw, What I will do for you."
"Instead of dancers to dance, mither, Or minstrells for to play, Turn four-and-twenty wall-wight men, 115 Like storks, in feathers gray;
"My seven sons in seven swans, Aboon their heads to flee;
And I, mysell, a gay gos-hawk, A bird o' high degree." 120 Then sichin' said the queen hersell, "That thing's too high for me;"
But she applied to an auld woman, Who had mair skill than she.
Instead o' dancers to dance a dance, 125 Or minstrells for to play, Four-and-twenty wall-wight men Turn'd birds o' feathers gray;
Her seven sons in seven swans, Aboon their heads to flee; 130 And he, himsell, a gay gos-hawk, A bird o' high degree.
This flock o' birds took flight and flew Beyond the raging sea;
And landed near the Earl Mar's castle, 135 Took shelter in every tree.
They were a flock o' pretty birds, Right comely to be seen;
The people view'd them wi' surprise, As they danc'd on the green. 140 These birds ascended frae the tree, And lighted on the ha';
And at the last wi' force did flee Among the nobles a'.
The storks there seized some o' the men, 145 They cou'd neither fight nor flee;
The swans they bound the bride's best man, Below a green aik tree.
They lighted next on maidens fair, Then on the bride's own head; 150 And wi' the twinkling o' an e'e, The bride and them were fled.
There's ancient men at weddings been, For sixty years or more;
But sic a curious wedding-day 155 They never saw before.
For naething cou'd the companie do, Nor naething cou'd they say;
But they saw a flock o' pretty birds That took their bride away. 160 When that Earl Mar he came to know Where his dochter did stay, He sign'd a bond o' unity, And visits now they pay.
YOUNG AKIN.
Mr. Kinloch printed a fragment of this ballad under the title of _Hynde Etin_. (See Appendix.) The story was afterwards given complete by Buchan, (_Ballads of the North of Scotland_, i. 6,) as here follows. Buchan had previously communicated to Motherwell a modernized version of the same tale, in which the Etin is changed to a Groom. (See _post_.) This ancient ballad has suffered severely in the course of its transmission to our times. Still there can be no doubt that it was originally the same as _The Maid and the Dwarf King_, which is still sung in Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and the Faroe Islands. Numerous copies of the Scandinavian ballad have been given to the world: seven Danish versions, more or less complete, four Norse, nine Swedish, one Faroish, and some other fragments (Grundtvig, ii. 37, and note, p.
655). One of the Swedish ballads (_Bergkonungen_, Afzelius, No.
35) is translated in Keightley's _Fairy Mythology_, 103, under the title of _Proud Margaret_. Closely related is _Agnete og Havmanden_, Grundtvig, ii. 48, 656, which is found in several forms in German (e.g.
_Die schoene Hannele_ in Hoffmann von Fallersleben's _Schlesische Volkslieder_, No. 1), and two in Slavic.
Lady Margaret sits in her bower door, Sewing at her silken seam;
She heard a note in Elmond's-wood, And wish'd she there had been.
She loot the seam fa' frae her side, 5 And the needle to her tae;
And she is on to Elmond-wood As fast as she coud gae.
She hadna pu'd a nut, a nut, Nor broken a branch but ane, 10 Till by it came a young hind chiel, Says, "Lady, lat alane.
"O why pu' ye the nut, the nut, Or why brake ye the tree?
For I am forester o' this wood: 15 Ye shou'd spier leave at me."
"I'll ask leave at no living man, Nor yet will I at thee;
My father is king o'er a' this realm, This wood belongs to me." 20 She hadna pu'd a nut, a nut, Nor broken a branch but three, Till by it came him Young Akin, And gar'd her lat them be.
The highest tree in Elmond's-wood, 25 He's pu'd it by the reet;
And he has built for her a bower Near by a hallow seat.
He's built a bower, made it secure Wi' carbuncle and stane; 30 Tho' travellers were never sae nigh, Appearance it had nane.
He's kept her there in Elmond's-wood, For six lang years and one;
Till six pretty sons to him she bear, 35 And the seventh she's brought home.
It fell ance upon a day, This guid lord went from home;
And he is to the hunting gane, Took wi' him his eldest son. 40 And when they were on a guid way, Wi' slowly pace did walk, The boy's heart being something wae, He thus began to talk:-- "A question I wou'd ask, father, 45 Gin ye wou'dna angry be?"
"Say on, say on, my bonny boy, Ye'se nae be quarrell'd by me."
"I see my mither's cheeks aye weet, I never can see them dry; 50 And I wonder what aileth my mither, To mourn continually."
"Your mither was a king's daughter, Sprung frae a high degree;
And she might hae wed some worthy prince, 55 Had she nae been stown by me.
"I was her father's cup-bearer, Just at that fatal time;
I catch'd her on a misty night, Whan summer was in prime. 60 "My luve to her was most sincere, Her luve was great for me;
But when she hardships doth endure, Her folly she does see."
"I'll shoot the buntin' o' the bush, 65 The linnet o' the tree, And bring them to my dear mither, See if she'll merrier be."
It fell upo' another day, This guid lord he thought lang, 70 And he is to the hunting gane, Took wi' him his dog and gun.
Wi' bow and arrow by his side, He's aff, single, alane;
And left his seven children to stay 75 Wi' their mither at hame.
"O, I will tell to you, mither, Gin ye wadna angry be:"
"Speak on, speak on, my little wee boy, Ye'se nae be quarrell'd by me." 80 "As we came frae the hynd hunting, We heard fine music ring:"
"My blessings on you, my bonny boy, I wish I'd been there my lane."
He's ta'en his mither by the hand, 85 His six brithers also, And they are on thro' Elmond's-wood, As fast as they coud go.
They wistna weel where they were gaen, Wi' the stratlins o' their feet; 90 They wistna weel where they were gaen, Till at her father's yate.
"I hae nae money in my pocket, But royal rings hae three;
I'll gie them you, my little young son, 95 And ye'll walk there for me.
"Ye'll gi'e the first to the proud porter,[L97] And he will lat you in;
Ye'll gi'e the next to the butler boy, And he will show you ben; 100 "Ye'll gi'e the third to the minstrel That plays before the king;
He'll play success to the bonny boy Came thro' the wood him lane."
He ga'e the first to the proud porter, 105 And he open'd an' let him in;
He ga'e the next to the butler boy, And he has shown him ben;
He ga'e the third to the minstrel That play'd before the king; 110 And he play'd success to the bonny boy Came thro' the wood him lane.
Now when he came before the king, Fell low down on his knee:
The king he turned round about, 115 And the saut tear blinded his ee.
"Win up, win up, my bonny boy, Gang frae my companie;
Ye look sae like my dear daughter, My heart will birst in three." 120 "If I look like your dear daughter, A wonder it is none;
If I look like your dear daughter, I am her eldest son."
"Will ye tell me, ye little wee boy, 125 Where may my Margaret be?"
"She's just now standing at your yates, And my six brithers her wi'."
"O where are all my porter boys That I pay meat and fee, 130 To open my yates baith wide and braid?
Let her come in to me."
When she came in before the king, Fell low down on her knee:
"Win up, win up, my daughter dear, 135 This day ye'll dine wi me."
"Ae bit I canno' eat, father, Nor ae drop can I drink, Till I see my mither and sister dear, For lang for them I think." 140 When she came before the queen, Fell low down on her knee:
"Win up, win up, my daughter dear, This day ye'se dine wi' me."
"Ae bit I canno' eat, mither, 145 Nor ae drop can I drink, Until I see my dear sister, For lang for her I think."
When that these two sisters met, She hail'd her courteouslie: 150 "Come ben, come ben, my sister dear, This day ye'se dine wi' me."
"Ae bit I canno' eat, sister, Nor ae drop can I drink, Until I see my dear husband, 155 For lang for him I think."
"O where are all my rangers bold That I pay meat and fee, To search the forest far an' wide, And bring Akin to me?" 160 Out it speaks the wee little boy,-- "Na, na, this maunna be;
Without ye grant a free pardon, I hope ye'll nae him see."
"O here I grant a free pardon, 165 Well seal'd by my own han';
Ye may make search for young Akin, As soon as ever you can."
They search'd the country wide and braid, The forests far and near, 170 And found him into Elmond's-wood, Tearing his yellow hair.
"Win up, win up, now young Akin.
Win up, and boun wi' me;
We're messengers come from the court; 175 The king wants you to see."
"O lat him take frae me my head, Or hang me on a tree;
For since I've lost my dear lady, Life's no pleasure to me." 180 "Your head will nae be touch'd, Akin, Nor hang'd upon a tree:
Your lady's in her father's court, And all he wants is thee."
When he came in before the king, 185 Fell low down on his knee:
"Win up, win up now, young Akin, This day ye'se dine wi' me."
But as they were at dinner set, The boy asked a boun; 190 "I wish we were in the good church, For to get christendoun.
"We ha'e lived in guid green wood This seven years and ane;
But a' this time since e'er I mind, 195 Was never a church within."
"Your asking 's nae sae great, my boy, But granted it shall be;
This day to guid church ye shall gang, And your mither shall gang you wi'." 200 When unto the guid church she came, She at the door did stan';
She was sae sair sunk down wi' shame, She coudna come farer ben.