but how dim is the illumination in which it is invested, and how feeble its influence, compared with that evidence of sight and touch which is the foundation of Physical Science! How easily can we be talked out of our clearest views of duty! how does this or that moral precept crumble into nothing when we rudely handle it! how does the fear of sin pass off from us, as quickly as the glow of modesty dies away from the countenance! and then we say, "It is all superstition." However, after a time we look round, and then to our surprise we see, as before, the same law of duty, the same moral precepts, the same protests against sin, appearing over against us, in their old places, as if they never had been brushed away, like the divine handwriting upon the wall at the banquet. Then perhaps we approach them rudely, and inspect them irreverently, and accost them sceptically, and away they go again, like so many spectres,—shining in their cold beauty, but not presenting themselves bodily to us, for our inspection, so to say, of their hands and their feet. And thus these awful, supernatural, bright, majestic, delicate apparitions, much as we may in our hearts acknowledge their sovereignty, are no match as a foundation of Science for the hard, palpable, material facts which make up the province of Physics. Recurring to my original illustration, it is as if the India Commander-in-Chief, instead of being under the control of a local seat of government at Calcutta, were governed simply from London, or from the moon. In that case, he would be under a strong temptation to neglect the home government, which nevertheless in theory he acknowledged.
Such, I say, is the natural condition of mankind:—we depend upon a seat of government which is in another world; we are directed and governed by intimations from above; we need a local government on earth.
That great institution, then, the Catholic Church, has been set up by Divine Mercy, as a present, visible antagonist, and the only possible antagonist, to sight and sense. Conscience, reason, good feeling, the instincts of our moral nature, the traditions of Faith, the conclusions and deductions of philosophical Religion, are no match at all for the stubborn facts (for they _are_ facts, though there are other facts besides them), for the facts, which are the foundation of physical, and in particular of medical, science. Gentlemen, if you feel, as you must feel, the whisper of a law of moral truth within you, and the impulse to believe, be sure there is nothing whatever on earth which can be the sufficient champion of these sovereign authorities of your soul, which can vindicate and preserve them to you, and make you loyal to them, but the Catholic Church. You fear they will go, you see with dismay that they are going, under the continual impression created on your mind by the details of the material science to which you have devoted your lives. It is so—I do not deny it; except under rare and happy circumstances, go they will, unless you have Catholicism to back you up in keeping faithful to them.
The world is a rough antagonist of spiritual truth: sometimes with mailed hand, sometimes with pertinacious logic, sometimes with a storm of irresistible facts, it presses on against you. What it says is true perhaps as far as it goes, but it is not the whole truth, or the most important truth. These more important truths, which the natural heart admits in their substance, though it cannot maintain,—the being of a God, the certainty of future retribution, the claims of the moral law, the reality of sin, the hope of supernatural help,—of these the Church is in matter of fact the undaunted and the only defender.
Even those who do not look on her as divine must grant as much as this. I do not ask you for more here than to contemplate and recognize her as a fact,—as other things are facts. She has been eighteen hundred years in the world, and all that time she has been doing battle in the boldest, most obstinate way in the cause of the human race, in maintenance of the undeniable but comparatively obscure truths of Religion. She is always alive, always on the alert, when any enemy whatever attacks them. She has brought them through a thousand perils. Sometimes preaching, sometimes pleading, sometimes arguing,—sometimes exposing her ministers to death, and sometimes, though rarely, inflicting blows herself,—by peremptory deeds, by patient concessions,—she has fought on and fulfilled her trust.
No wonder so many speak against her, for she deserves it; she has earned the hatred and obloquy of her opponents by her success in opposing them.
Those even who speak against her in this day, own that she was of use in a former day. The historians in fashion with us just now, much as they may disown her in their own country, where she is an actual, present, unpleasant, inconvenient monitor, acknowledge that, in the middle ages which are gone, in her were lodged, by her were saved, the fortunes and the hopes of the human race. The very characteristics of her discipline, the very maxims of her policy, which they reprobate now, they perceive to have been of service then. They understand, and candidly avow, that once she was the patron of the arts, the home and sanctuary of letters, the basis of law, the principle of order and government, and the saviour of Christianity itself. They judge clearly enough in the case of others, though they are slow to see the fact in their own age and country; and, while they do not like to be regulated by her, and kept in order by her, themselves, they are very well satisfied that the populations of those former centuries should have been so ruled, and tamed, and taught by her resolute and wise teaching. And be sure of this, that as the generation now alive admits these benefits to have arisen from her presence in a state of society now gone by, so in turn, when the interests and passions of this day are passed away, will future generations ascribe to her a like special beneficial action upon this nineteenth century in which we live.
For she is ever the same,—ever young and vigorous, and ever overcoming new errors with the old weapons.
5.
And now I have explained, Gentlemen, why it has been so highly expedient and desirable in a country like this to bring the Faculty of Medicine under the shadow of the Catholic Church. I say "in a country like this;"
for, if there be any country which deserves that Science should not run wild, like a planet broken loose from its celestial system, it is a country which can boast of such hereditary faith, of such a persevering confessorship, of such an accumulation of good works, of such a glorious name, as Ireland. Far be it from this country, far be it from the counsels of Divine Mercy, that it should grow in knowledge and not grow in religion! and Catholicism is the strength of Religion, as Science and System are the strength of Knowledge.
Aspirations such as these are met, Gentlemen, I am well aware, by a responsive feeling in your own hearts; but by my putting them into words, thoughts which already exist within you are brought into livelier exercise, and sentiments which exist in many breasts hold intercommunion with each other. Gentlemen, it will be your high office to be the links in your generation between Religion and Science. Return thanks to the Author of all good that He has chosen you for this work. Trust the Church of God implicitly, even when your natural judgment would take a different course from hers, and would induce you to question her prudence or her correctness. Recollect what a hard task she has; how she is sure to be criticized and spoken against, whatever she does;—recollect how much she needs your loyal and tender devotion. Recollect, too, how long is the experience gained in eighteen hundred years, and what a right she has to claim your assent to principles which have had so extended and so triumphant a trial. Thank her that she has kept the faith safe for so many generations, and do your part in helping her to transmit it to generations after you.
For me, if it has been given me to have any share in so great a work, I shall rejoice with a joy, not such indeed as I should feel were I myself a native of this generous land, but with a joy of my own, not the less pure, because I have exerted myself for that which concerns others more nearly than myself. I have had no other motive, as far as I know myself, than to attempt, according to my strength, some service to the cause of Religion, and to be the servant of those to whom as a nation the whole of Christendom is so deeply indebted; and though this University, and the Faculty of Medicine which belongs to it, are as yet only in the commencement of their long career of usefulness, yet while I live, and (I trust) after life, it will ever be a theme of thankfulness for my heart and my lips, that I have been allowed to do even a little, and to witness so much, of the arduous, pleasant, and hopeful toil which has attended on their establishment.
NOTE ON PAGE 478.
I think it worthwhile, in illustration of what I have said above at the page specified, to append the following passage from Grandorgæus's catalogue of Muratori's works.
"Sanctissimus D.N. Benedictus xiv. Pont. Max. Epistolam sapientiæ ac roboris plenam dederat … ad Episcopum Terulensem Hispaniæ Inquisitionis Majorem Inquisitorem, quâ illum hortabatur, ut 'Historiam Pelagianam et dissertationem, etc.,' editas à claræ memoriæ Henrico Cardinali Norisio, in Indicem Expurgatorium Hispanum nuper ingestas, perinde ac si aliquid Baianismi aut Jansenismi redolerent, prout auctor 'Bibliothecæ Jansenisticæ' immerito autumavit, quamprimum expungendas curaret. Eoque nomine Sapientissimus Pontifex plura in medium attulit prudentis œconomiæ exempla, qua semper usum, supremum S. R. Congr. Indicis Tribunal, à proscribendis virorum doctissimorum operibus aliquando temperavit.
"Quum autem summus Pontifex, ea inter nomina illustria Tillemontii, Bollandistarum, Bosoueti Ep. Meld., et illud recensuerit L. A. Muratorii, his ad Auctorem nostrum delatis, quam maximè indoluit, veritus ne in tantâ operum copiâ ab se editorum, aliquid Fidei aut Religioni minùs consonum sibi excidisset.… "Verùm clementissimus Pontifex ne animum desponderet doctus et humilis filius, pernumaniter ad ipsum rescripsit … eumque paternè consolatus, inter alia hæc habet: 'Quanto si era detto nella nostra Lettera all'
Inquisitore di Spagna in ordine alle di Lei Opere, non aveva che fare con la materia delle Feste, nè con verun dogma o disciplina. Il contenuto delle Opere chi qui non è piaciuto (nè che Ella poteva mai lusingarsi che fosse per piacere), riguarda la Giurisdizione Temporale del Romano Pontifice nè suoi stati,' " etc. (pp. lx., lxi).
INDEX.
ABELARD, 96, age of, 263 Accomplishments not education, 144 Addison, his _Vision of Mirza_, 279;
his care in writing, 284;
the child of the Revolution, 312, 329 Æschylus, 258 Alcuin, 17 Aldhelm, St., 17 Alexander the Great, his delight in Homer, 258;
conquests of, 264 Anaxagoras, 116 Andes, the, 136 Animuccia and St. Philip Neri, 237 Apollo Belvidere, the, 283 Aquinas, St. Thomas, 134, 263, 384 Arcesilas, 101 Architecture, 81 Arian argument against our Lord's Divinity, 95 Ariosto, 316 Aristotelic philosophy, the, 52 Aristotle, xii., 6, 53;
quoted, 78, 101, 106, 109, 134, 222, 275;
his sketch of the magnanimous man, 280, 383, 431, 469 Athens, the fountain of secular knowledge, 264 Augustine, St., of Canterbury, mission of, 16 Augustine, St., of Hippo, quoted, 410 BACCI'S Life of St. Philip Neri, quoted, 236 Bacon, Friar, xiii., 220 Baconian philosophy, the, 109 Bacon, Lord, quoted, 77, 90, 117-119, 175, 221, 225, 263, 319, 437 Balaam, 66 Beethoven, 286, 313 Bentham's _Preuves Judiciaires_, 96 Berkeley, Bishop, on Gothic Architecture, 81 Boccaccio, 316 Boniface, St., 220 Borromeo, St. Carlo, enjoins the use of some of the Latin classics, 261;
on preaching, 406, 412, 414, 421 Bossuet and Bishop Bull, 7 Brougham, Lord, his Discourse at Glasgow, quoted, 30, 34-35 Brutus, abandoned by philosophy, 116 Burke, Edmund, 176;
his valediction to the spirit of chivalry, 201 Burman, 140 Butler, Bishop, his Analogy, 61, 100, 158, 226 Byron, Lord, his versification, 326 CAIETAN, St., 235 Campbell, Thomas, 322, 326 Carneades, 106 Cato the elder, his opposition to the Greek philosophy, 106 Catullus, 325 Chinese civilization, 252 Christianity and Letters, 249 Chrysostom, St., on Judas, 86 Cicero, quoted, 77;
on the pursuit of knowledge, 104, 116, 260;
style of, 281, 282, 327;
quoted, 399;
his orations against Verres, 421 Civilization and Christianity, 255 Clarendon, Lord, 311 Colours, combination of, 100 "Condescension," two senses of, 205 Copleston, Dr., Bishop of Llandaff, 157;
quoted, 167-169 Corinthian brass, 175 Cowper, quoted, 191, 467 Crabbe, his _Tales of the Hall_, 150;
his versification, 326 Craik, Dr. G. L., his _Pursuit of Knowledge under Difficulties_, quoted, 103, 104 DANTE, 316, 329 Davison, John, 158;
on Liberal Education, 169-177 Definiteness, the life of preaching, 426 Demosthenes, 259, 284 Descartes, 315 Dumesnil's Synonymes, 368 Du Pin's Ecclesiastical History, 140 EDGEWORTH, Mr., on Professional Education, 158, 170, 176 Edinburgh, 154 _Edinburgh Review_, the, 153, 157, 160, 301, 329 Edward II., King of England, vow at his flight from Bannockburn, 155 Elmsley, xiv.
Epicurus, 40 Euclid's Elements, 274, 313, 501 Euripides, 258 FENELON, on the Gothic style of Architecture, 82 Fontaine, La, his immoral _Contes_, 315 Fouqué, Lamotte, his tale of the _Unknown Patient_, 119 Fra Angelico, 287 Franklin, 304 Frederick II., 383, 384 GALEN, 222 Gentleman, the true, defined, 208 Gerdil, Cardinal, quoted, xiii., on the Emperor Julian, 194;
on Malebranche, 477 Giannone, 316 Gibbon, on the darkness at the Passion, 95;
his hatred of Christianity, 195, 196;
his care in writing, 285;
influence of his style on the literature of the present day, 323;
his tribute to Hume and Robertson, 325 Goethe, 134 Gothic Architecture, 82 Grammar, 96, 334 Gregory the Great, St., 260 HARDOUIN, Father, on Latin literature, 310 Health, 164 Herodotus, 284, 325, 329 Hobbes, 311 Homer, his address to the Delian women, 257;
his best descriptions, according to Sterne, marred by translation, 271 Hooker, 311 Horace, quoted, 257, 258, 329 Horne Tooke, 96 Hume, 40, 58;
style of, 325 Humility, 206 Huss, 155 JACOB'S courtship, 232 Jeffrey, Lord, 157 Jerome, St., on idolizing the creature, 87 Jerusalem, the fountain-head of religious knowledge, 264 Ignatius, St., 235 Job, religious merry-makings of, 232;
Book of, 289 John, King, 383 John of Salisbury, 262 Johnson, Dr., his method of writing the Ramblers, xx.;
his vigour and resource of intellect, xxi.;
his definition of the word _University_, 20;
his _Rasselas_ quoted, 116-117;
style of, 283;
his Table-talk, 313;
his bias towards Catholicity, 319;
his definition of _Grammar_, 334 Joseph, history of, 271 Isaac, feast at his weaning, 232 Isocrates, 282 Julian the Apostate, 194 Justinian, 265 Juvenal, 325 KEBLE, John, 158;
his Latin Lectures, 369 Knowledge, its own end, 99;
viewed in relation to learning, 124;
to professional skill, 151;
to religion, 179 LALANNE, Abbé, 9 Leo, St., on the love of gain, 87 Literature, 268 Locke, on Education, 158-160, 163, 319 Logos, 276 Lohner, Father, his story of a court-preacher, 411 Longinus, his admiration of the Mosaic account of Creation, 271 Lutheran leaven, spread of the, 28 MACAULAY, Lord, his Essay on Bacon's philosophy, 118, 221;
his _Essays_ quoted, 301, 435-438, 450 Machiavel, 316 Malebranche, 477 Maltby, Dr., bishop of Durham, his Address to the Deity, 33, 40 Michael Angelo, first attempts of, 283 Milman, Dean, his History of the Jews, 85 Milton, on Education, 169;
his _Samson Agonistes_ quoted, 323;
his allusions to himself, 329 Modesty, 206 Montaigne's Essays, 315 More, Sir Thomas, 437 Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, 140 Muratori, 478, 520 Music, 80 NERI, St. Philip, 234 Newton, Sir Isaac, xiii., 49, 53;
on the Apocalypse, 304;
his marvellous powers, 324 Newtonian philosophy, the, 49 Noah's ark, 73 OLYMPIC games, the, 107 Optics, 46 PAINTING, 79 Palestrina, 237 Paley, 58, 449 Palladio, 57 Pascal, 315 Patrick, St., greatness of his work, 15 Periodical criticism, 333 Persian mode of letter-writing, 277 Pindar, 329 Pitt, William, his opinion of Butler's Analogy, 100 Pius IV., Pope, death of, 237 Plato, on poets, 101;
on music, 110 Playfair, Professor, 157 Political Economy, 86 Pompey's Pillar, 136 Pope, Alex., quoted, 118;
an indifferent Catholic, 318;
has tuned our versification, 323;
quoted, 375, 501 Porson, Richard, xiv., 304 Pride and self-respect, 207 Private Judgment, 97 Protestant argument against Transubstantiation, 95 Psalter, the, 289 Pulci, 316 Pythagoras, xiii RABELIAS, 315 Raffaelle, first attempts of, 283; 287 _Rasselas_ quoted, 116 Recreations not Education, 144 Robertson, style of, 325 Rome, 265 Round Towers of Ireland, the, 95 SALES, St Francis de, on preaching, 406, 410, 411 Salmasius, 140 Savonarola, 235 Scott, Sir Walter, 313;
his _Old Mortality_, 359 Seneca, 110, 116, 327 Sermons of the seventeenth century, 140 Shaftesbury, Lord, his _Characteristics_, 196-201, 204 Shakespeare, quoted, 150;
his _Macbeth_ quoted, 280;
_Hamlet_ quoted, 281;
quoted, 284, 287;
morality of, 318;
quoted, 410, 513 Simon of Tournay, narrative of, 384 Smith, Sydney, 157 Sophocles, 258 Southey's _Thalaba_, 323;
quoted, 324 Sterne's Sermons, quoted, 270-272 Stuffing birds not education, 144 Sylvester II., Pope, accused of magic, 220 TARPEIA, 140 Taylor, Jeremy, his _Liberty of Prophesying_, 472 Terence and Menander, 259 Tertullian, 327 Thales, xiii.
Theology, a branch of knowledge, 19;
definition of, 60 Thucydides, 259, 325, 329 Titus, armies of, 265 VIRGIL, his obligations to Greek poets, 259;
wishes his Æneid burnt, 284;
fixes the character of the hexameter, 325, 329 Voltaire, 303, 315 UTILITY in Education, 161 WATSON, Bishop, on Mathematics, 101 Wiclif, 155 Wren, Sir Christopher, 57 XAVIER, St. Francis, 235 Xenophon quoted, 107, 258 FINIS.
FOOTNOTES _ 1 Vid._ Huber's English Universities, London, 1843, vol. ii., part 1, pp. 321, etc.
2 Opere, t. iii., p. 353.
3 Vide M. L'Abbé Lalanne's recent work.
4 Cressy.
5 In Roman law it means a Corporation. Vid. Keuffel, _de Scholis_.
6 Hist. vol. ii. p. 529. London, 1841.
7 Mr. Brougham's Glasgow Discourse.
8 Arist. Ethic. Nicom., iii. 3.
9 Introd. Lecture on Pol. Econ. pp. 11, 12.
10 Advancement of Learning.
11 Intr. Lect., p. 16.
12 Vid. Abelard, for instance.
13 Pursuit of Knowledge under Difficulties. Introd.
14 Cicer. Offic. init.
15 Τέχνη τύχην ἔστερχε καὶ τύχη τέχνην. Vid. Arist. Nic. Ethic. vi.
16 Aristot. Rhet. i. 5.
17 It will be seen that on the whole I agree with Lord Macaulay in his Essay on Bacon's Philosophy. I do not know whether he would agree with me.
18 De Augment. iv. 2, vid. Macaulay's Essay; vid. also "In principio operis ad Deum Patrem, Deum Verbum, Deum Spiritum, preces fundimus humillimas et ardentissimas, ut humani generis ærumnarum memores, et peregrinationis istius vitæ, in quâ dies paucos et malos terimus, _novis suis eleemosynis, per manus nostras_, familiam humanam dotare digneatur. Atque illud insuper supplices rogamus, ne _humana divinis officiant_; neve _ex reseratione viarum sensûs_, et accensione majore luminis naturalis, _aliquid incredulitatis_ et noctis, animis nostris erga divina mysteria oboriatur," etc. _Præf._ Instaur. Magn.
19 Fouque's Unknown Patient.
20 The pages which follow are taken almost _verbatim_ from the author's 14th (Oxford) University Sermon, which, at the time of writing this Discourse, he did not expect ever to reprint.
21 Crabbe's Tales of the Hall. This Poem, let me say, I read on its first publication, above thirty years ago, with extreme delight, and have never lost my love of it; and on taking it up lately, found I was even more touched by it than heretofore. A work which can please in youth and age, seems to fulfil (in logical language) the _accidental definition_ of a Classic. [A further course of twenty years has past, and I bear the same witness in favour of this Poem.] 22 Mr. Keble, Vicar of Hursley, late Fellow of Oriel, and Professor of Poetry in the University of Oxford.
23 Vid. Milton on Education.
24 I do not consider I have said above any thing inconsistent with the following passage from Cardinal Gerdil, though I have enlarged on the favourable side of Julian's character. "Du génie, des connaissances, de l'habilité dans le métier de la guerre, du courage et du désintéressement dans le commandement des armées, des actions plutôt que des qualités estimables, mais le plus souvent gâtées par la vanité qui en était le principe, la superstition jointe à l'hypocrisie; un esprit fécond en ressources éclairé, mais susceptible de petitesse; des fautes essentielles dans le gouvernement; des innocens sacrifiés à la vengeance; une haine envenimée contre le Christianisme, qu'il avait abandonné; un attachement passionné aux folies de la Théurgie; tels étaient les traits sous lesquels on nous preignait Julien." Op. t. x. p. 54.
25 Gibbon, Hist., ch. 24.
26 Vid. Hallam's Literature of Europe, Macaulay's Essay, and the Author's Oxford University Sermons, IX.
27 In Augment., 5.
28 De Augm., § 28.
_ 29 Vid._ the Author's Parochial Sermons, vol. i. 25.
30 Bacci, vol. i., p. 192, ii., p. 98.
31 Now LORD EMLY.
_ 32 Vid._ Huber.
_ 33 Vid._ the treatises of P. Daniel and Mgr. Landriot, referred to in Historical Sketches, vol. ii., p. 460, note.
34 Sterne, Sermon xlii.
35 "Position of Catholics in England," pp. 101, 2.
36 August, 1854.
37 Macaulay's Essays.
38 Hallam.
39 Misc. Works, p. 55.
40 This was written in June, 1854, before the siege began.
41 Bombarding.
42 The Black Sea.
43 Here again Mr. Brown prophesies. He wrote in June, 1854.
_ 44 Vid._ University Sermons, vii., 14.
_ 45 Vid._ Article I.
46 Macaulay's Essays.
47 I use the word, not in the sense of "Naturalis Theologia," but, in the sense in which Paley uses it in the work which he has so entitled.
48 Cardinal Gerdil speaks of his "Metaphysique," as "brillante à la verité, mais non moins solide" (p. 9.), and that "la liaison qui enchaine toutes les parties du système philosophique du Père Malebranche,… pourra servir d'apologie à la noble assurance, avec laquelle il propose ses sentiments." (p. 12, Œuvres, t. iv.) 49 Muratori's work was not directly theological. _Vid._ note at the end of the Volume.
50 University Gazette, No. 42, p. 420.
_ 51 Vid._ supr. p. 231.
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IDEA OF A UNIVERSITY DEFINED AND ILLUSTRATED *** Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg electronic works 1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works provided that:
• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516, Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.