"Very good," said Earl, uneasily — " 'taint no affair of nine — as you like to have it, so you'll have it — just as you please! But now, Fleda, there's another thing I want to speak to you about — I want you to let me take hold of that 'ere piece of swamp land and bring it in. I knew a man that fixed a piece of land like that, and cleared nigh a thousand dollars off it the first year."
"Which piece?" said Fleda.
"Why, you know which 'tis — just the other side of the trees over there between them two little hills. There's six or seven acres of it — nothin' in the world but mud and briers — will you let me take hold of it. I'll do the hull job if you'll give me half the profits for one year. Come over and look at it, and I'll tell you — come! — the walk wont hurt you, and it aint fur."
All Fleda's inclinations said no, but she thought it was not best to indulge them. She put on her hood and went off with him; and was treated to a long and most implicated detail of ways and means, from which she at length disentangled the _rationale_ of the matter, and gave Mr. Douglass the consent he asked for, promising to gain that of her uncle.
The day was fair and mild, and in spite of weariness of body, a certain weariness of mind prompted Fleda, when she had got rid of Earl Douglass, to go and see her aunt Miriam. She went, questioning with herself all the way, for her want of goodwill to these matters. True, they were not pleasant mind-work; but she tried to school herself into taking them patiently as good life-work. She had had too much pleasant company, and enjoyed too much conversation she said. It had unfitted her for home duties.
Mrs. Plumfield, she knew, was no better. But her eye found no change for the worse. The old lady was very glad to see her, and very cheerful and kind as usual.
"Well, are you glad to be home again?" said aunt Miriam, after a pause in the conversation.
"Everybody asks me that question," said Fleda, smiling.
"Perhaps for the same reason I did — because they thought you didn't look very glad."
"I am glad," said Fleda, "but I believe not so glad as I was last year."
"Why not?"
"I suppose I had a pleasanter time. I have got a little spoiled, I believe, aunt Miriam," Fleda said, with glistening eyes and an altering voice — "I don't take up my old cares and duties kindly at first — I shall be myself again in a few days."
Aunt Miriam looked at her with that fond, wistful, benevolent look which made Fleda turn away.
"What has spoiled you, love?"
"Oh! — easy living and pleasure, I suppose," Fleda said, but said with difficulty.
"Pleasure?" said aunt Miriam, putting one arm gently round her. Fleda struggled with herself.
"It is so pleasant, aunt Miriam, to forget these money cares!
— to lift one's eyes from the ground, and feel free to stretch out one's hand — not to be obliged to think about spending sixpences, and to have one's mind at liberty for a great many things that I haven't time for here. And Hugh — and aunt Lucy — somehow things seem sad to me." — Nothing could be more sympathizingly kind than the way in which aunt Miriam brought Fleda closer to her side, and wrapped her in her arms.
"I am very foolish," Fleda whispered. "I am very wrong — I shall get over it."
"I am afraid, dear Fleda," Mrs. Plumfield said, after a pause, "it isn't best for us always to be without sad things — though I cannot bear to see your dear little face look sad — but it wouldn't fit us for the work we have to do — it wouldn't fit us to stand where I stand now, and look forward happily."
"Where you stand?" said Fleda, raising her head.
"Yes, and I would not be without a sorrow I have ever known.
They are bitter now, when they are present — but the sweet fruit comes after."
"But what do you mean by 'where you stand?' "
"On the edge of life."
"You do not think so, aunt Miriam!" Fleda said, with a terrified look. "You are not worse?"
"I don't expect ever to be better," said Mrs. Plumfield, with a smile. "Nay, my love," she said, as Fleda's head went down on her bosom again — "not so! I do not wish it either, Fleda.
I do not expect to leave you soon, but I would not prolong the time by a day. I would not have spoken of it now if I had recollected myself; but I am so accustomed to think and speak of it, that it came out before I knew it. My darling child, it is nothing to cry for."
"I know it, aunt Miriam."
"Then don't cry," whispered aunt Miriam, when she had stroked Fleda's head for five minutes.
"I am crying for myself, aunt Miriam," said Fleda. "I shall be left alone."
"Alone, my dear child?"
"Yes — there is nobody but you that I feel I can talk to."
She would have added that she dared not say a word to Hugh, for fear of troubling him. But that pain at her heart stopped her, and pressing her hands together, she burst into bitter weeping.
"Nobody to talk to but me?" said Mrs. Plumfield, after again soothing her for some time — "what do you mean, dear?"
"Oh, I can't say anything to them at home," said Fleda, with a forced effort after voice; "and you are the only one I can look to for help — Hugh never says anything — almost never — anything of that kind; he would rather others should counsel him."
"There is One friend to whom you may always tell everything, with no fear of wearying Him — of whom you may at all times ask counsel, without any danger of being denied — more dear, more precious, more rejoiced in, the more he is sought unto.
Thou mayest lose friend after friend, and gain more than thou losest — in that one."
"I know it," said Fleda; "but dear aunt Miriam, don't you think human nature longs for some human sympathy and help too?"
"My sweet blossom! yes," said Mrs. Plumfield, caressingly, stroking her bowed head; "but let Him do what he will; he hath said, 'I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.' "
"I know that too," said Fleda, weeping. "How do people bear life that do not know it?"
"Or that cannot take the comfort of it. Thou art not poor nor alone while thou hast him to go to, little Fleda. And you are not losing me yet, my child; you will have time, I think, to grow as well satisfied as I with the prospect."
"Is that possible, for _others?_" said Fleda.
The mother sighed as her son entered the room.
He looked uncommonly grave, Fleda thought. That did not surprise her, but it seemed that it did his mother, for she asked an explanation, which, however, he did not give.
"So you've got back from New York," said he.
"Just got back yesterday," said Fleda.
"Why didn't you stay longer?"
"I thought my friends at home would be glad to see me," said Fleda. "Was I mistaken?"
He made no answer for a minute, and then said — "Is your uncle at home?"
"No," said Fleda; "he went away this morning on business, and we do not expect him home before nightfall. Do you want to see him?"
"No," said Seth, very decidedly. "I wish he had staid in Michigan, or gone further west — anywhere that Queechy'd never have heard of him."
"Why, what has he done?" said Fleda, looking up, half laughing, and half amazed at her cousin. But his face was disagreeably dark, though she could not make out that the expression was one of displeasure. It did not encourage her to talk.
"Do you know a man in New York by the name of Thorn?" he said, after standing still a minute or two.
"I know two men of that name," said Fleda, colouring and wondering.
"Is either on 'em a friend of your'n?"
"No"
"He aint?" said Mr. Plumfield, giving the forestick on the fire an energetic kick, which Fleda could not help thinking was mentally aimed at the said New Yorker.
"No, certainly, what makes you ask?"
"Oh," said Seth, drily, "folks' tongues will find work to do;
I heerd say something like that; I thought you must take to him more than I do."
"Why what do you know of him?"
"He's been here a spell lately," said Seth, "poking round;
more for ill than for good, I reckon."
He turned, and quitted the room abruptly; and Fleda bethought her that she must go home while she had light enough.
CHAPTER XII.
"Nothing could be more obliging and respectful than the lion's letter was, in appearance; but there was death in the true intent."
L'ESTRANGE.
The landscape had grown more dark since Fleda came up the hill, or else the eyes that looked at it. Both, probably. It was just after sundown, and that is a very sober time of day in winter, especially in some states of the weather. The sun had left no largesses behind him; the scenery was deserted to all the coming poverty of night, and looked grim and threadbare already. Not one of the colours of prosperity left.
The land was in mourning dress; all the ground, and even the ice on the little mill-ponds, a uniform spread of white, while the hills were draperied with black stems, here just veiling the snow, and there on a side view making a thick fold of black. Every little unpainted workshop or mill showed uncompromisingly all its forbidding sharpness of angle and outline darkening against the twilight. In better days, perhaps, some friendly tree had hung over it, shielding part of its faults, and redeeming the rest. Now nothing but the gaunt skeleton of a friend stood there — doubtless to bud forth again as fairly as ever, should the season smile. Still and quiet, all was, as Fleda's spirit, and in too good harmony with it; she resolved to choose the morning to go out in future. There was as little of the light of spring or summer in her own mind as on the hills, and it was desirable to catch at least a cheering reflection. She could rouse herself to no bright thoughts, try as she would; the happy voices of nature that used to speak to her were all hushed, or her ear was deaf; and her eye met nothing that did not immediately fall in with the train of sad images that were passing through her mind, and swell the procession. She was fain to fall back and stay herself upon these words, the only stand-by she could lay hold of: — "TO THEM WHO, BY PATIENT CONTINUANCE IN WELL-DOING SEEK FOR GLORY, AND HONOUR, AND IMMORTALITY, ETERNAL LIFE!"
They toned with the scene and with her spirit exactly; they suited the darkening sky and the coming night; for "glory, honour, and immortality" are not now. They filled Fleda's mind after they had once entered, and then nature's sympathy was again as readily given; each barren, stern-looking hill in its guise of present desolation and calm expectancy seemed to echo softly, "patient continuance in well-doing." And the tears trembled then in Fleda's eyes; she had set her face, as the old Scotchman says, "in the right airth."* [* Quarter, direction.] "How sweet is the wind that bloweth out of the airth where Christ is!"
"Well," said Hugh, who entered the kitchen with her, "you have been late enough. Did you have a pleasant walk? You are pale, Fleda."
"Yes, it was pleasant," said Fleda, with one of her winning smiles — "a kind of pleasant. But have you looked at the hills? They are exactly as if they had put on mourning — nothing but white and black — a crape-like dressing of black tree-stems upon the snowy face of the ground, and on every slope and edge of the hills the crape lies in folds. Do look at it when you go out! It has a most curious effect."
"Not pleasant, I should think?" said Hugh.
"You'll see it is just as I have described it. No; not pleasant, exactly; the landscape wants the sun to light it up just now — it is cold and wilderness-looking. I think I'll take the morning in future. Whither are you bound?"
"I must go over to Queechy Run for a minute, on business — I'll be home before supper — I should have been back by this time, but Philetus has gone to bed with a headache, and I had to take care of the cows."
"Three times and out," said Barby. "I wont try again. [ didn't know as anything would be too powerful for his head; but I find, as sure as he has apple dumplin' for dinner, he goes to bed for his supper, and leaves the cows without none. And then Hugh has to take it. It has saved so many Elephants — that's one thing."
Hugh went out by one door, and Fleda by another entered the breakfast-room, the one generally used in winter for all purposes. Mrs. Rossitur sat there alone in an easy-chair; and Fleda no sooner caught the outline of her figure than her heart sank at once to an unknown depth — unknown before and unfathomable now. She was cowering over the fire — her head sunk in her hands, so crouching, that the line of neck and shoulders instantly conveyed to Fleda the idea of fancied or felt degradation — there was no escaping it — how, whence, what, was all wild confusion. But the language of mere attitude was so unmistakable — the expression of crushing pain was so strong, that, after Fleda had fearfully made her way up beside her, she could do no more. She stood there tongue-tied, spell-bound, present to nothing but a nameless chill of fear and heart-sinking. She was afraid to speak — afraid to touch her aunt, and abode motionless in the grasp of that dread for minutes. But Mrs. Rossitur did not stir a hair, and the terror of that stillness grew to be less endurable than any other.
Fleda spoke to her — it did not win the shadow of a reply — again and again. She laid her hand then upon Mrs. Rossitur's shoulder, but the very significant answer to that, was a shrinking gesture of the shoulder and neck away from the hand.
Fleda, growing desperate, then implored an answer in words — prayed for an explanation — with an intensity of distress in voice and manner, that no one whose ears were not stopped with a stronger feeling could have been deaf to; but Mrs. Rossitur would not raise her head, nor slacken in the least the clasp of the fingers that supported it; that of themselves in their relentless tension spoke what no words could. Fleda's trembling prayers were in vain — in vain. Poor nature at last sought a woman's relief in tears — but they were heart- breaking, not heart-relieving tears — racking both mind and body more than they ought to bear, but bringing no cure. Mrs.
Rossitur seemed as unconscious of her niece's mute agony as she had been of her agony of words; and it was from Fleda's own self-recollection alone that she fought off pain, and roused herself above weakness to do what the time called for.
"Aunt Lucy," she said, laying her hand upon her shoulder, and this time the voice was steady, and the hand would not be shaken off — "Aunt Lucy, Hugh will be in presently — hadn't you better rouse yourself and go up stairs — for awhile? — till you are better? — and not let him see you so?" — How the voice was broken and quivering before it got through?
The answer this time was a low long-drawn moan, so exceeding plaintive and full of pain that it made Fleda shake like an aspen. But after a moment she spoke again, bearing more heavily with her hand to mark her words.
"I am afraid he will be in presently — he ought not to see you now. Aunt Lucy, I am afraid it might do him an injury he might not get over" — She spoke with the strength of desperation; her nerves were unstrung by fear, and every joint weakened, so that she could hardly support herself. She had not, however, spoken in vain;
one or two convulsive shudders passed over her aunt, and then Mrs. Rossitur suddenly rose, turning her face from Fleda;
neither would she permit her to follow her. But Fleda thought she had seen that one or two unfolded letters or papers of some kind — they looked like letters — were in her lap when she raised her head.
Left alone, Fleda sat down on the floor by the easy chair, and rested her head there, waiting — she could do nothing else — till her extreme excitement of body and mind should have quieted itself. She had a kind of vague hope that time would do something for her before Hugh came in. Perhaps it did; for though she lay in a kind of stupor, and was conscious of no change whatever she was able, when she heard him coming, to get up and sit in the chair in an ordinary attitude. But she looked like the wraith of herself an hour ago.
"Fleda!" Hugh exclaimed, as soon as he looked from the fire to her face; "what is the matter? — what is the matter with you?"
"I am not very well — I don't feel very well," said Fleda, speaking almost mechanically; "I shall have a headache to- morrow." — "Headache! But you look shockingly: what has happened to you?
what is the matter, Fleda?"
"I am not ill — I shall be better by and by. There is nothing the matter with me that need trouble you, dear Hugh."
"Nothing the matter with you," said he, and Fleda might see how she looked in the reflection of his face; "where's mother?"
"She is up stairs — you mustn't go to her, Hugh!" said Fleda, laying a detaining hand upon him with more strength than she thought she had; "I don't want anything."
"Why mustn't I go to her?"
"I don't think she wants to be disturbed" — "I must disturb her" — "You mustn't! — I know she don't — she isn't well — something has happened to trouble her" — "What?"
"I don't know."
"And is that what has troubled you, too?" said Hugh, his countenance changing as he gained more light on the subject;
"what is it, dear Fleda?"
"I don't know," repeated Fleda, bursting into tears. Hugh was quiet enough now, and sat down beside her, subdued and still, without even desiring to ask a question. Fleda's tears flowed violently for a minute, then she checked them for his sake, and they sat motionless, without speaking to one another, looking into the fire, and letting it die out before them into embers and ashes, neither stirring to put a hand to it. As the fire died, the moonlight streamed in : how very dismal the room looked!
"What do you think about having tea?" said Barby, opening the door of the kitchen.
Neither felt it possible to answer her.
"Mr. Rossitur aint come home, is he?"
"No," said Fleda, shuddering.
"So I thought, and so I told Seth Plumfield, just now — he was asking for him. My stars! ha'n't you no fire here? what did you let it go out for?"
Barby came in and began to build it up.
"It's growing cold, I can tell you, so you may as well have something in the chimney to look at. You'll want it shortly, if you don't now."
"Was Mr. Plumfield here, did you say, Barby?"
"Yes."
"Why didn't he come in!"
"I s'pose he hadn't a mind to," said Barby. " 'Twa'n't for want of being asked. I did the civil thing by him if he didn't by me; but he said he didn't want to see anybody but Mr.
Rossitur."
Did not want to see anybody but Mr. Rossitur, when he had distinctly said he did not wish to see him! Fleda felt sick, merely from the mysterious dread which could fasten upon nothing, and therefore took in everything.
"Well, what about tea?" concluded Barby, when the fire was going according to her wishes. "Will you have it, or will you wait longer?"
"No, we wont wait; we will have it now, Barby," said Fleda, forcing herself to make the exertion; and she went to the window to put down the hangings.
The moonlight was very bright, and Fleda's eye was caught in the very act of letting down the curtain, by a figure in the road slowly passing before the courtyard fence. It paused a moment by the horse-gate, and turning, paced slowly back till it was hid behind the rose-acacias. There was a clump of shrubbery in that corner thick enough even in winter to serve for a screen. Fleda stood with the curtain in her hand, half let down, unable to move, and feeling almost as if the very currents of life within her were standing still, too. She thought, she was almost sure, she knew the figure; it was on her tongue to ask Hugh to come and look, but she checked that.
The form appeared again from behind the acacias, moving with the same leisurely pace the other way towards the horse-gate.
Fleda let down the curtain, then the other two, quietly, and then left the room, and stole, noiselessly, out at the front door, leaving it open, that the sound of it might not warn Hugh what she was about; and stepping like a cat down the steps, ran, breathlessly, over the snow to the courtyard gate;
there waited, shivering in the cold, but not feeling it for the cold within, while the person she was watching stood still a few moments by the horse-gate, and came again, with leisurely steps towards her.
"Seth Plumfield!" said Fleda, almost as much frightened at the sound of her own voice as he was. He stopped immediately, with a start, and came up to the little gate behind which she was standing, but said nothing.
"What are you doing here?"
"You oughtn't to be out without anything on," said he — "you're fixing to take your death."
He had good reason to say so. But she gave him no more heed than the wind.
"What are you waiting here for? What do you want?"
"I have nothing better to do with my time," said he; "I thought I'd walk up and down here a little. You go in!"
"Are you waiting to see uncle Rolf?" she said, with teeth chattering.
"You mustn't stay out here," said he, earnestly; "you're like nothing but a spook this minute — I'd rather see one, or a hull army of 'em. Go in, go in!"
"Tell me if you want to see him, Seth."
"No, I don't — I told you I didn't."
"Then why are you waiting for him?"
"I thought I'd see if he was coming home to-night — I had a word to say if I could catch him before he got into the house."
"_Is_ he coming home to-night?" said Fleda.
"I don't know!" said he, looking at her. "Do you!"
Fleda burst open the gate between them, and putting her hands on his, implored him to tell her what was the matter. He looked singularly disturbed; his fine eye twinkled with compassion; but his face, never a weak one, showed no signs of yielding now.
"The matter is," said he, pressing hard both her hands, "that you are fixing to be down sick in your bed by to-morrow. You mustn't stay another second."
"Come in, then."
"No — not to-night."
"You wont tell me?"
"There is nothing I can tell you — maybe there'll be nothing to tell — run in, run in, and keep quiet."
Fleda hurried back to the house, feeling that she had gone to the limit of risk already. Not daring to show herself to Hugh in her chilled state of body and mind, she went into the kitchen.
"Why, what on earth's come over you!" was Barby's terrified ejaculation, when she saw her.
"I have been out and got myself cold —"
"Cold!" said Barby — "you're looking dreadful! What on earth ails you, Fleda?"
"Don't ask me, Barby," said Fleda, hiding her face in her hands, and shivering; "I made myself very cold just now — Aunt Lucy doesn't feel very well, and I got frightened," she added, presently.
"What's the matter with her?"
"I don't know — if you'll make me a cup of tea, I'll take it up to her, Barby."
"You put yourself down there," said Barby, placing her with gentle force in a chair; "you'll do no such a thing till I see you look as if there was some blood in you. I'll take it up myself."
But Fleda held her, though with a hand much too feeble indeed for any but moral suasion. It was enough. Barby stood silently, and very anxiously watching her, till the fire had removed the outward chill at least. But even that took long to do, and before it was well done, Fleda again asked for the cup of tea. Barby made it without a word, and Fleda went to her aunt with it, taking her strength from the sheer emergency.
Her knees trembled under her as she mounted the stairs, and once a glimpse of those words flitted across her mind — "patient continuance in well-doing." It was like a lightning flash in a dark night showing the way one must go. She could lay hold of no other stay. Her mind was full of one intense purpose — to end the suspense.
She gently tried the door of her aunt's room; it was unfastened, and she went in. Mrs. Rossitur was lying on the bed; but her first mood had changed, for at Fleda's soft word and touch she half rose up, and, putting both arms round her waist, laid her face against her. There were no tears still, only a succession of low moans, so inexpressibly weak and plaintive, that Fleda's nature could hardly bear them without giving way. A more fragile support was never clung to. Yet her trembling fingers, in their agony, moved caressingly among her aunt's hair and over her brow, as she begged her — when she could, she was not able at first — to let her know the cause that was grieving her. The straitened clasp of Mrs. Rossitur's arms, and her increased moaning, gave only an answer of pain.
But Fleda repeated the question. Mrs. Rossitur still neglecting it, then made her sit down upon the bed, so that she could lay her head higher on Fleda's bosom; where she hid it, with a mingling of fondness given and asked — a poor seeking for comfort and rest, that wrung her niece's heart.
They sat so for a little time; Fleda hoping that her aunt would by degrees come to the point herself. The tea stood cooling on the table, not even offered; not wanted there.
"Wouldn't you feel better if you told me, dear aunt Lucy?"
said Fleda, when they had been for a little while perfectly still. Even the moaning had ceased.
"Is your uncle come home?" whispered Mrs. Rossitur, but so low that Fleda could but half catch the words.
"Not yet."
"What o'clock is it?"
"I don't know — not early — it must be near eight. — Why?"
"You have not heard anything of him?"
"No — nothing."
There was silence again for a little, and then Mrs. Rossitur said in a low, fearful whisper — "Have you seen anybody round the house?"
Fleda's thoughts flew to Seth, with that nameless fear to which she could give neither shape nor direction, and after a moment's hesitation she said — "What do you mean?"
"Have you?" said Mrs. Rossitur, with more energy.
"Seth Plumfield was here a little while ago."
Her aunt had the clue that she had not, for with a half scream, half exclamation, she quitted Fleda's arms, and fell back upon the pillows, turning from her and hiding her face there. Fleda prayed again for her confidence, as well as the weakness and the strength of fear could do; and Mrs. Rossitur presently grasping a paper that lay on the bed, held it out to her, saying only, as Fleda was about quitting the room, "Bring me a light."
Fleda left the letter there and went down to fetch one. She commanded herself under the excitement and necessity of the moment — all but her face; that terrified Barby exceedingly.
But she spoke with a strange degree of calmness; told her Mrs.
Rossitur was not alarmingly ill; that she did not need Barby's services, and wished to see nobody but herself, and didn't want a fire. As she was passing through the hall again, Hugh came out of the sitting-room to ask after his mother. Fleda kept the light from her face.
"She does not want to be disturbed — I hope she will be better to-morrow."
"What is the matter, Fleda?"
"I don't know yet."
"And you are ill yourself, Fleda? — you are ill?" — "No — I shall do very well — never mind me. Hugh, take some tea — I will be down by and by."
He went back, and Fleda went up stairs. Mrs. Rossitur had not moved. Fleda set down the light, and herself beside it, with the paper her aunt had given her. It was a letter.
"Queechy, Thursday.
"It gives me great concern, my dear Madam, to be the means of bringing to you a piece of painful information — but it cannot be long kept from your knowledge, and you may perhaps learn it better from me than by any other channel. May I entreat you not to be too much alarmed, since I am confident the cause will be of short duration?
"Pardon me for what I am about to say.
"There are proceedings entered into against Mr. Rossitur — there are writs out against him — on the charge of having, some years ago, endorsed my father's name upon a note of his own giving. Why it has lain so long I cannot explain. There is, unhappily, no doubt of the fact.
"I was in Queechy some days ago, on business of my own, when I became aware that this was going on — my father had made no mention of it to me. I immediately took strict measures, I am happy to say, I believe with complete success — to have the matter kept a profound secret. I then made my way as fast possible to New York to confer on the subject with the original mover of it — unfortunately I was disappointed. My father had left for a neighbouring city, to be absent several days. Finding myself too late to prevent, as I had hoped to do, any open steps from being taken at Queechy, I returned hither immediately to enforce secrecy of proceedings and to assure you, Madam, that my utmost exertions shall not be wanting to bring the whole matter to a speedy and satisfactory termination. I entertain no doubt of being able to succeed entirely — even to the point of having the whole transaction remain unknown and unsuspected by the world. It is so entirely as yet, with the exception of one or two law officers, whose silence I have means of procuring.
"May I confess that I am not entirely disinterested? May the selfishness of human nature ask its reward, and own its moving spring! May I own that my zeal in this cause is quickened by the unspeakable excellencies of Mr. Rossitur's lovely niece — which I have learned to appreciate with my whole heart — and be forgiven? And may I hope for the kind offices and intercession of the lady I have the honour of addressing, with her niece, Miss Ringgan, that my reward — the single word of encouragement I ask for — may be given me? Having that, I will promise anything — I will guarantee the success of any enterprise, however difficult, to which she may impel me — and I will undertake that the matter which furnishes the painful theme of this letter shall never more be spoken or thought of by the world, or my father, or by Mrs. Rossitur's obliged, grateful, and faithful servant, LEWIS THORN."
Fleda felt, as she read, as if icicles were gathering about her heart. The whirlwind of fear and distress of a little while ago, which could take no definite direction, seemed to have died away and given place to a dead frost — the steady bearing down of disgrace and misery, inevitable, unmitigable, unchangeable; no lessening, no softening of that blasting power, no, nor ever any rising up from under it; the landscape could never be made to smile again. It was the fall of a bright star from their home constellation, but alas! the star was fallen long ago, and the failure of light which they had deplored was all too easily accounted for; yet now they knew that no restoration was to be hoped. And the mother and son — what would become of them? And the father — what would become of him? what further distress was in store? — Public disgrace?
— and Fleda bowed her head forward on her clasped hands with the mechanical, vain endeavour to seek rest or shelter from thought. She made nothing of Mr. Thorn's professions, she took only the facts of his letter; the rest her eye had glanced over as if she had no concern with it, and it hardly occurred to her that she had any. But the sense of his words she had taken in, and knew, better perhaps than her aunt, that there was nothing to look for from his kind offices. The weight on her heart was too great just then for her to suspect, as she did afterwards, that he was the sole mover of the whole affair.
As the first confusion of thought cleared away, two images of distress loomed up and filled the view — her aunt, broken under the news, and Hugh still unknowing to them; her own separate existence Fleda was hardly conscious of. Hugh especially — how was he to be told, and how could he bear to hear, with his most sensitive conformation of both physical and moral nature? And if an arrest should take place there that night! — Fleda shuddered, and, unable to go on thinking, rose up and went to her aunt's bedside. It had not entered her mind till the moment she read Mr. Thorn's letter that Seth Plumfield was sheriff for the county. She was shaking again from head to foot with fear. She could not say anything — the touch of her lips to the throbbing temples, soft and tender as sympathy itself, was all she ventured.
"Have you heard anything of him?" Mrs. Rossitur whispered.
"No — I doubt if we do at all to-night."
There was a half breathed "Oh!" — of indescribable pain and longing; and with a restless change of position Mrs. Rossitur gathered herself up on the bed and sat with her head leaning on her knees. Fleda brought a large cloak and put it round her.
"I am in no danger," she said — "I wish I were!"
Again Fleda's lips softly, tremblingly touched her cheek.
Mrs. Rossitur put her arm round her and drew her down to her side, upon the bed, and wrapped half of the big cloak about her; and they sat there still in each other's arms, without speaking or weeping, while quarter after quarter of an hour passed away — nobody knew how many. And the cold bright moonlight streamed in on the floor, mocking them.
"Go!" whispered Mrs. Rossitur, at last — "go down stairs, and take care of yourself — and Hugh."
"Wont you come?"
Mrs. Rossitur shook her head.
"Mayn't I bring you something? — do let me."
But Mrs. Rossitur's shake of the head was decisive. Fleda crawled off the bed, feeling as if a month's illness had been making its ravages upon her frame and strength. She stood a moment to collect her thoughts; but alas, thinking was impossible; there was a palsy upon her mind. She went into her own room, and for a minute kneeled down — not to form a petition in words — she was as much beyond that; it was only the mute attitude of appeal, the pitiful outward token of the mind's bearing, that could not be forborne — a silent uttering of the plea she had made her own in happy days. There was something of comfort in the mere feeling of doing it; and there was more in one or two words that even in that blank came to her mind — "_Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him;_" and she again recollected that "Providence runneth not upon broken wheels."
Nothing could be darker than the prospect before her, and these things did not bring light; but they gave her a sure stay to hold on by and keep her feet — a bit of strength to preserve from utterly fainting. Ah! the store-house must be filled, and the mind well familiarized with what is stored in it while yet the days are bright, or it will never be able to find what it wants in the dark.
Fleda first went into the kitchen to tell Barby to fasten the doors, and not sit up.
"I don't believe uncle Rolf will be home to-night; but if he comes, I will let him in."
Barby looked at her with absolutely a face of distress; but not daring to ask, and not knowing how to propose anything, she looked in silence.
"It must be nine o'clock now," Fleda went on.
"And how long be you going to sit up?" said Barby.
"I don't know — a while yet."
"You look proper for it!" said Barby, half sorrowfully and half indignantly; "you look as if a straw would knock you down this minute. There's sense into everything. You catch me a- going to bed, and leaving you up! It wont do me no hurt to sit here the hull night; and I'm the only one in the house that's fit for it, with the exception of Philetus, and the little wit he has by day seems to forsake him at night. All the light that ever gets into his head, _I_ believe, comes from the outside; as soon as ever that's gone, he shuts up his shutters. He's been snoozing a'ready now this hour and a half.
Go yourself off to bed, Fleda," she added, with a mixture of reproach and kindness, "and leave me alone to take care of myself and the house too."
Fleda did not remonstrate, for Barby was as determined in her way as it was possible for anything to be. She went into the other room without a particle of notion what she should say or do.
Hugh was walking up and down the floor — a most unusual sign of perturbation with him. He met and stopped her as she came in.
"Fleda, I cannot bear it. What is the matter? Do you know?" he said, as her eyes fell.
"Yes —"
"What is it?"
She was silent, and tried to pass on to the fire. But he stayed her.
"What is it?" he repeated.
"Oh, I wish I could keep it from you!" said Fleda, bursting into tears.
He was still a moment; and then, bringing her to the arm- chair, made her sit down, and stood himself before her, silently waiting, perhaps because he could not speak, perhaps from the accustomed gentle endurance of his nature. But Fleda was speechless too.
"You are keeping me in distress," he said, at length.
"I cannot end the distress, dear Hugh," said Fleda.
She saw him change colour, and he stood motionless still.
"Do you remember," said Fleda, trembling even to her voice, "what Rutherford says about Providence 'not running on broken wheels?' "
He gave her no answer but the intent look of expectation. Its intentness paralysed Fleda. She did not know how to go on. She rose from her chair and hung upon his shoulder.
"Believe it now, if you can; for oh, dear Hugh! we have something to try it."
"It is strange my father don't come home," said he, supporting her with tenderness, which had very little strength to help it; "we want him very much."
Whether or not any unacknowledged feeling prompted this remark, some slight involuntary movement of Fleda's made him ask, suddenly — "Is it about him?"
He had grown deadly pale, and Fleda answered, eagerly — "Nothing that has happened to-day — it is not anything that has happened to-day: he is perfectly well, I trust and believe."
"But it is about him?"
Fleda's head sank, and she burst into such an agony of tears that Hugh's distress was for a time divided.
"When did it happen, Fleda?"
"Years ago."
"And what?"
Fleda hesitated still, and then said — "It was something he did, Hugh."
"What?"
"He put another person's name on the back of a note he gave."
She did not look up, and Hugh was silent for a moment.
"How do you know?"
"Mr. Thorn wrote it to aunt Lucy; it was Mr. Thorn's father."
Hugh sat down and leaned his head on the table. A long, long, time passed — unmeasured by the wild coursing of thought to and fro. Then Fleda came and knelt down at the table beside him, and put her arm round his neck.
"Dear Hugh," she said — and if ever love, and tenderness, and sympathy could be distilled in tones, such drops were those that fell upon the mind's ear — "can't you look up at me?"
He did then, but he did not give her a chance to look at him.
He locked his arms about her, bringing her close to his breast; and for a few minutes, in utter silence, they knew what strange sweetness pure affection can mingle, even in the communion of sorrow. There were tears shed in those minutes that, bitter as they seemed at the time, memory knew had been largely qualified with another admixture.
"Dear Hugh," said Fleda, "let us keep what we can. Wont you go to bed and rest?"
He looked dreadfully as if he needed it; but the usual calmness and sweetness of his face was not altered; it was only deepened to very great sadness. Mentally, Fleda thought, he had borne the shock better than his mother; for the bodily frame she trembled. He had not answered, and she spoke again.
"You need it worse than I, poor Fleda."
"I will go, too, presently: I do not think anybody will be here to-night."
"Is — are there — is this what has taken him away?" said Hugh.
Her silence and her look told him; and then, laying her cheek again alongside of his, she whispered (how unsteadily!) — "We have only one help, dear Hugh."
They were still and quiet again for minutes, counting the pulses of pain, till Fleda came back to her poor wish "to keep what they could." She mixed a restorative of wine and water, which, however little desired, she felt was necessary for both of them, and Hugh went up stairs. She staid a few minutes to prepare another glass, with particular care, for her aunt. It was just finished, and, taking her candle, she had bid Barby good night, when there came a loud rap at the front door.
Fleda set down candle and glass, from the quick inability to hold them, as well as for other reasons, and she and Barby stood and looked at each other, in such a confusion of doubt and dread, that some little time had passed before either stirred even her eyes. Barby then threw down the tongs, with which she had begun to make preparations for covering up the fire, and set off to the front.
"You mustn't open the door, Barby," cried Fleda, following her. "Come in here, and let us look out of one of the windows."
Before this could be reached, however, there was another prolonged repetition of the first thundering burst. It went through Fleda's heart, because of the two up stairs who must hear it.
Barby threw up the sash.
"Who's there?"
"Is this Mr. Rossitur's place?" inquired a gruff voice.
"Yes, it is."
"Well will you come round and open the door?"
"Who wants it open?"
"A lady wants it open."
"A lady! — what lady?"
"Down yonder, in the carriage."
"What lady? — who is she?"
"I don't know who she is: she wanted to come to Mr. Rossitur's place. Will you open the door for her?"
Barby and Fleda both now saw a carriage standing in the road.
"We must see who it is first," whispered Fleda.
"When the lady comes, I'll open the door," was Barby's ultimatum.
The man withdrew to the carriage, and, after a few moments of intense watching, Fleda and Barby certainly saw something in female apparel enter the little gate of the court-yard, and come up over the bright, moonlit snow towards the house, accompanied by a child; while the man with whom they had had the interview came behind, transformed into an unmistakable baggage-carrier.
CHAPTER XIII.
"Zeal was the spring whence flowed her hardiment."
FAIRFAX.
Barby undid bolt and lock, and Fleda met the traveller in the hall. She was a lady; her air and dress showed that, though the latter was very plain.
"Does Mr. Rossitur live here?" was her first word.
Fleda answered it, and brought her visitor into the sitting- room. But the light falling upon a form and face that had seen more wear and tear than time, gave her no clue as to the who or what of the person before her. The stranger's hurried look around the room seemed to expect something.
"Are they all gone to bed?"
"All but me," said Fleda.
"We have been delayed — we took a wrong road — we've been riding for hours to find the place — hadn't the right direction." Then, looking keenly at Fleda, from whose vision an electric spark of intelligence had scattered the clouds, she said — "I am Marion Rossitur."
"I knew it!" said Fleda, with lips and eyes that gave her already a sister's welcome; and they were folded in each other's arms almost as tenderly and affectionately, on the part of one at least, as if there had really been the relationship between them. But more than surprise and affection struck Fleda's heart.
"And where are they all, Fleda? Can't I see them?"
"You must wait till I have prepared them; Hugh and aunt Lucy are not very well. I don't know that it will do for you to see them at all to-night, Marion."
"Not to-night! They are not ill?"
"No — only enough to be taken care of — not ill. But it would be better to wait."
"And my father?"
"He is not at home."
Marion exclaimed in sorrow, and Fleda, to hide the look that she felt was on her face, stooped down to kiss the child. He was a remarkably fine-looking, manly boy.
"That is your cousin Fleda," said his mother.
"No — _aunt_ Fleda," said the person thus introduced — "don't put me off into cousindom, Marion. I am uncle Hugh's sister — and so I am your aunt Fleda. Who are you?"
"Rolf Rossitur Schwiden."
Alas, how wide are the ramifications of evil! How was what might have been very pure pleasure utterly poisoned and turned into bitterness! It went through Fleda's heart with a keen pang, when she heard that name and looked on the very fair brow that owned it, and thought of the ineffaceable stain that had come upon both. She dared look at nobody but the child. He already understood the melting eyes that were making acquaintance with his, and half felt the pain that gave so much tenderness to her kiss, and looked at her with a grave face of awakening wonder and sympathy. Fleda was glad to have business to call her into the kitchen.
"Who is it?" was Barby's immediate question.
"Aunt Lucy's daughter."
"She don't look much like her!" said Barby, intelligently.
"They will want something to eat, Barby."
"I'll put the kettle on. It'll boil directly. I'll go in there and fix up the fire."
A word or two more, and then Fleda ran up to speak to her aunt and Hugh.
Her aunt she found in a state of agitation that was frightful.
Even Fleda's assurances, with all the soothing arts she could bring to bear, were some minutes before they could in any measure tranquillize her. Fleda's own nerves were in no condition to stand another shock, when she left her and went to Hugh's door. But she could get no answer from him, though she spoke repeatedly.
She did not return to her aunt's room. She went down stairs, and brought up Barby and a light from thence.
Hugh was lying senseless and white — not whiter than his adopted sister, as she stood by his side. Her eye went to her companion.
"Not a bit of it!" said Barby, — "he's in nothing but a faint — just run down stairs and get the vinegar-bottle, Fleda — the pepper vinegar. Is there any water here?" — Fleda obeyed, and watched — she could little more — the efforts of Barby, who indeed needed no help, with the cold water, the vinegar, and rubbing of the limbs. They were for some time unsuccessful — the fit was a severe one, and Fleda was exceedingly terrified before any signs of returning life came to reassure her.
"Now, you go down stairs and keep quiet!" said Barby, when Hugh was fairly restored, and had smiled a faint answer to Fleda's kiss and explanations — "Go, Fleda! you aint fit to stand. Go and sit down some place, and I'll be along directly and see how the fire burns. Don't you s'pose Mis' Rossitur could come in, and sit in this easy-chair a spell without hurting herself?"
It occurred to Fleda immediately, that it might do more good than harm to her aunt if her attention were diverted even by another cause of anxiety. She gently summoned her, telling her no more than was necessary to fit her for being Hugh's nurse, and, in a very few minutes, she and Barby were at liberty to attend to other claims upon them. But it sank into her heart, "Hugh will not get over this!" — and when she entered the sitting-room, what Mr. Carleton, years before, had said of the wood-flower, was come true in its fullest extent — "A storm- wind had beaten it to the ground."
She was able, literally, to do no more than Barby had said — sit down and keep herself quiet. Miss Elster was in her briskest mood, flew in and out, made up the fire in the sitting-room, and put on the kettle in the kitchen, which she had been just about doing when called to see Hugh. The much- needed supper of the travellers must be still waited for; but the fire was burning now, the room was cozily warm and bright, and Marion drew up her chair with a look of thoughtful contentment. Fleda felt as if some conjurer had been at work there for the last few hours — the room looked so like and felt so unlike itself.
"Are you going to be ill too, Fleda?" said Marion, suddenly.
"You are looking — very far from well!"
"I shall have a headache to-morrow," said Fleda, quietly, — "I generally know the day beforehand."
"Does it always make you look so?"
"Not always — I am somewhat tired."
"Where is my father gone?"
"I don't know. Rolf, dear," said Fleda, bending forward to the little fellow, who was giving expression to some very fidgety impatience — "what is the matter? — what do you want?"
The child's voice fell a little from its querulousness towards the sweet key in which the questions had been put, but he gave utterance to a very decided wish for "bread and butter."
"Come here," said Fleda, reaching out a hand and drawing him, certainly with no force but that of attraction, towards her easy-chair — "come here and rest yourself in this nice place by me — see, there is plenty of room for you — and you shall have bread and butter and tea, and something else, too, I guess, just as soon as Barby can get it ready."
"Who is Barby?" was the next question, in a most uncompromising tone of voice.
"You saw the woman that came in to put wood on the fire — that was Barby — she is very good and kind, and will do anything for you if you behave yourself."
The child muttered, but so low as to show some unwillingness that his words should reach the ears that were nearest him, that "he wasn't going to behave himself."
Fleda did not choose to hear, and went on with composing observations, till the fair little face she had drawn to her side was as bright as the sun, and returned her smile with interest.
"You have an admirable talent at moral suasion, Fleda," said the mother, half smiling — "I wish I had it."
"You don't need it so much here."
"Why not?"
"It may do very well for me, but I think, not so well for you."
"Why? — what do you mean? I think it is the only way in the world to bring up children — the only way fit for rational beings to be guided."
Fleda smiled, though the faintest indication that lips could give, and shook her head — ever so little.
"Why do you do that? — tell me."
"Because, in my limited experience," said Fleda, as she passed her fingers through the boy's dark locks of hair — "in every household where 'moral suasion' has been the law, the children have been the administrators of it. Where is your husband?"
"I have lost him — years ago" — said Marion, with a quick expressive glance towards the child. "I never lost what I at first thought I had, for I never had it. Do you understand?"
Fleda's eyes gave a sufficient answer.
"I am a widow — these five years — in all but what the law would require," Marion went on. "I have been alone since then — except my child. He was two years old then; and since then I have lived such a life, Fleda!"
"Why didn't you come home?"
"Couldn't — the most absolute reason in the world. Think of it! — Come home! It was as much as I could do to stay there!"
Those sympathizing eyes were enough to make her go on.
"I have wanted everything — except trouble. I have done everything — except ask alms. I have learned, Fleda, that death is not the worst form in which distress can come."
Fleda felt stung, and bent down her head to touch her lips to the brow of little Rolf.
"Death would have been a trifle!" said Marion. "I mean — not that _I_ should have wished to leave Rolf alone in the world;
but if I had been left — I mean I would rather wear outside than inside mourning."
Fleda looked up again, and at her.
"Oh, I was so mistaken, Fleda!" she said, clasping her hands — "so mistaken! — in everything; — so disappointed — in all my hopes. And the loss of my fortune was the cause of it all."
Nay, verily! thought Fleda, but she said nothing; she hung her head again; and Marion, after a pause, went on to question her about an endless string of matters concerning themselves and other people, past doings and present prospects, till little Rolf, soothed by the uninteresting soft murmur of voices, fairly forgot bread and butter and himself in a sound sleep, his head resting upon Fleda.
"Here is one comfort for you, Marion," she said, looking down at the dark eyelashes which lay on a cheek rosy and healthy as ever seven years old knew; " he is a beautiful child, and I am sure, a fine one."
"It is thanks to his beauty that I have ever seen home again,"
said his mother.
Fleda had no heart this evening to speak words that were not necessary; her eyes asked Marion to explain herself.
"He was in Hyde Park one day — I had a miserable lodging not far from it, and I used to let him go in there, because he must go somewhere, you know — I couldn't go with him —"
"Why not?"
"Couldn't! — Oh Fleda! — I have seen changes! — He was there one afternoon, alone, and had got into difficulty with some bigger boys — a little fellow, you know — he stood his ground manfully, but his strength wasn't equal to his spirit, and they were tyrannizing over him after the fashion of boys, who are, I do think, the ugliest creatures in creation!" said Mme.
Schwiden, not apparently reckoning her own to be of the same gender — "and a gentleman, who was riding by, stopped and interfered, and took him out of their hands, and then asked him his name — struck, I suppose, with his appearance. Very kind, wasn't it? men so seldom bother themselves about what becomes of children. I suppose there were thousands of others riding by at the same time."
"Very kind," Fleda said.
"When he heard what his name was, he gave his horse to his servant, and walked home with Rolf; and the next day he sent me a note, speaking of having known my father and mother, and asking permission to call upon me. I never was so mortified, I think, in my life," said Marion, after a moment's hesitation.
"Why?" said Fleda, not a little at a loss to follow out the chain of her cousin's reasoning.
"Why, I was in such a sort of a place, you don't know, Fleda;
I was working then for a fancy storekeeper, to support myself — living in a miserable little two rooms. If it had been a stranger, I wouldn't have cared so much, but somebody that had known us in different times. I hadn't a thing in the world to answer the note upon but a half-sheet of letter paper."
Fleda's lips sought Rolf's forehead again, with a curious rush of tears and smiles at once. Perhaps Marion had caught the expression of her countenance, for she added, with a little energy — "It is nothing to be surprised at — you would have felt just the same; for I knew by his note, the whole style of it, what sort of a person it must be."
"My pride has been a good deal chastened," Fleda said, gently.
"I never want _mine_ to be, beyond minding everything," said Marion; "and I don't believe yours is. I don't know why in the world I did not refuse to see him — I had fifty minds to — but he had won Rolf's heart, and I was a little curious, and it was something strange to see the face of a friend, any better one than my old landlady, so I let him come."
"Was _she_ a friend?" said Fleda.
"If she hadn't been, I should not have lived to be here; the best soul that ever was; but still, you know, she could do nothing for me but be as kind as she could live; this was something different. So I let him come, and he came the next day."
Fleda was silent, a little wondering that Marion should be so frank with her, beyond what she had ever been in former years;
but, as she guessed, Mme. Schwiden's heart was a little opened by the joy of finding herself at home, and the absolute necessity of talking to somebody; and there was a further reason, which Fleda could not judge of, in her own face and manner. Marion needed no questions, and went on again, after stopping a moment.
"I was so glad, in five minutes — I can't tell you, Fleda — that I had let him come. I forgot entirely about how I looked, and the wretched place I was in. He was all that I had supposed, and a great deal more; but, somehow, he hadn't been in the room three minutes before I didn't care at all for all the things I had thought would trouble me. Isn't it strange what a witchery some people have to make you forget everything but themselves!"
"The reason is, I think, because that is the only thing they forget," said Fleda, whose imagination, however, was entirely busy with the _singular_ number.
"I shall never forget him," said Marion. "He was very kind to me — I cannot tell how kind — though I never realized it till afterwards; at the time, it always seemed only a sort of elegant politeness which he could not help. I never saw so elegant a person. He came two or three times to see me, and he took Rolf out with him, I don't know how often, to drive; and he sent me fruit — such fruit! and game, and flowers; and I had not had anything of the kind, not even seen it, for so long; I can't tell you what it was to me. He said he had known my father and mother well when they were abroad."
"What was his name?" said Fleda, quickly.
"I don't know — he never told me — and I never could ask him.
Don't you know, there are some people you can't do anything with, but just what they please? There wasn't the least thing like stiffness; you never saw anybody less stiff; but I never dreamed of asking him questions, except when he was out of sight. Why, do you know him?" she said, suddenly.
"When you tell me who he was, I'll tell you," said Fleda, smiling.
"Have you ever heard this story before?"
"Certainly not!"
"He is somebody that knows us very well," said Marion, "for he asked after every one of the family in particular."
"But what had all this to do with your getting home?"
"I don't wonder you ask. The day after his last visit, came a note, saying, that he owed a debt in my family, which it had never been in his power to repay; that he could not give the enclosure to my father, who would not recognise the obligation; and that if I would permit him to place it in my hands, I should confer a singular favour upon him."
"And what was the enclosure?"
"Five hundred pounds."
Fleda's head went down again, and tears dropped fast upon little Rolf's shoulder.
"I suppose my pride has been a little broken, too," Marion went on, "or I shouldn't have kept it. But then, if you saw the person, and the whole manner of it — I don't know how I could ever have sent it back. Literally I couldn't, though, for I hadn't the least clue. I never saw or heard from him afterwards."
"When was this, Marion?"
"Last spring."
"Last spring! — then what kept you so long?"
"Because of the arrival of eyes that I was afraid of. I dared not make the least move that would show I could move. I came off the very first packet after I was free."
"How glad you must be!" said Fleda.
"Glad!" — "Glad of what, Mamma?" said Rolf,. whose dreams the entrance of Barby had probably disturbed.
"Glad of bread and butter," said his mother; wake up — here it is."
The young gentleman declared, rubbing his eyes, that he did not want it now; but, however, Fleda contrived to dispel that illusion, and bread and butter was found to have the same dulcifying properties at Queechy that it owns in all the rest of the world. Little Rolf was completely mollified after a hearty meal, and was put with his mother to enjoy most unbroken slumbers in Fleda's room. Fleda herself, after a look at Hugh, crept to her aunt's bed; whither Barby very soon despatched Mrs. Rossitur, taking in her place the arm-chair and the watch with most invincible good-will and determination; and sleep at last took the joys and sorrows of that disturbed household into its kind custody.
Fleda was the first one awake, and was thinking how she should break the last news to her aunt, when Mrs. Rossitur put her arms round her, and, after a most affectionate look and kiss, spoke to what she supposed had been her niece's purpose.
"You want taking care of more than I do, poor Fleda!"
"It was not for that I came," said Fleda; "I had to give up my room to the travellers."
"Travellers!" — A very few words more brought out the whole, and Mrs. Rossitur sprang out of bed, and rushed to her daughter's room.
Fleda hid her face in the bed to cry — for a moment's passionate indulgence in weeping while no one could see. But a moment was all. There was work to do, and she must not disable herself. She slowly got up, feeling thankful that her headache did not announce itself with the dawn, and that she would be able to attend to the morning affairs and the breakfast, which was something more of a circumstance now with the new additions to the family. More than that, she knew, from sure signs, she would not be able to accomplish.
It was all done, and done well, though with what secret flagging of mind and body nobody knew or suspected. The business of the day was arranged, Barby's course made clear, Hugh visited and smiled upon; and then Fleda set herself down in the breakfast-room to wear out the rest of the day in patient suffering. Her little spaniel, who seemed to understand her languid step and faint tones, and know what was coming, crept into her lap and looked up at her with a face of equal truth and affection; and after a few gentle acknowledging touches from the loved hand, laid his head on her knees, and silently avowed his determination of abiding her fortunes for the remainder of the day.
They had been there for some hours. Mrs. Rossitur and her daughter were gathered in Hugh's room; whither Rolf also, after sundry expressions of sympathy for Fleda's headache, finding it a dull companion, had departed. Pain of body, rising above pain of mind, had obliged, as far as possible, even thought to be still; when a loud lap at the front door brought the blood in a sudden flush of pain to Fleda's face.
She knew instinctively what it meant.
She heard Barby's distinct accents saying that somebody was "not well." The other voice was more smothered. But in a moment the door of the breakfast-room opened, and Mr. Thorn walked in.
The intensity of the pain she was suffering effectually precluded Fleda from discovering emotion of any kind. She could not move. Only King lifted up his head and looked at the intruder, who seemed shocked, and well he might. Fleda was in her old headache position — bolt upright on the sofa, her feet on the rung of a chair, while her hands supported her by their grasp upon the back of it. The flush had passed away, leaving the deadly paleness of pain, which the dark rings under her eyes showed to be well seated.
"Miss Ringgan!" said the gentleman, coming up softly, as to something that frightened him — "my dear Miss Fleda! I am distressed! You are very ill. Can nothing be done to relieve you?"
Fleda's lips rather than her voice said, "Nothing."
"I would not have come in on any account to disturb you if I had known — I did not understand you were more than a trifle ill."
Fleda wished he would mend his .mistake, as his understanding certainly by this time was mended. But that did not seem to be his conclusion of the best thing to do.
"Since I am here, can you bear to hear me say three words, without too much pain? I do not ask you to speak."
A faint whispered "yes" gave him leave to go on. She had never looked at him. She sat like a statue; to answer by a motion of her head was more than could be risked.
He drew up a chair and sat down, while King looked at him with eyes of suspicious indignation.
"I am not surprised," he said gently, "to find you suffering.
I knew how your sensibilities must feel the shock of yesterday. I would fain have spared it you. I will spare you all further pain on the same score, if possible. Dear Miss Ringgan, since I am here, and time is precious, may I say one word before I cease troubling you? I take it for granted that you were made acquainted with the contents of my letter to Mrs. Rossitur? — with _all_ the contents? — were you?"
Again Fleda's lips almost voicelessly gave the answer.
"Will you give me what I ventured to ask for?" said he, gently, "the permission to work _for you?_ Do not trouble those precious lips to speak — the answer of these fingers will be as sure a warrant to me as all words that could be spoken, that you do not deny my request."
He had taken one of her hands in his own. But the fingers lay with unanswering coldness and lifelessness for a second in his clasp, and then were drawn away, and took determinate hold of the chair-back. Again the flush came to Fleda's cheeks, brought by a sharp pain — oh, bodily and mental too! — and, after a moment's pause, with a distinctness of utterance that let him know every word, she said, — "A generous man would not ask it, Sir."
Thorn sprang up, and several times paced the length of the room, up and down, before he said anything more. He looked at Fleda, but the flush was gone again, and nothing could seem less conscious of his presence. Pain and patience were in every line of her face, but he could read nothing more, except a calmness as unmistakably written. Thorn gave that face repeated glances as he walked, then stood still and read it at leisure. Then he came to her side again, and spoke in a different voice.
"You are so unlike anybody else," he said, "that you shall make me unlike myself. I will do freely what I hoped to do with the light of your smile before me. You shall hear no more of this affair, neither you nor the world — I have the matter perfectly in my own hands — it shall never raise a whisper again. I will move heaven and earth rather than fail — but there is no danger of my failing. I will try to prove myself worthy of your esteem, even where a man is most excusable for being selfish."
He took one of her cold hands again — Fleda could not help it without more force than she cared to use, and, indeed, pain would by this time almost have swallowed up other sensation if every word and touch had not sent it ill a stronger throb to her very finger-ends. Thorn bent his lips to her hand, twice kissed it fervently, and then left her, much to King's satisfaction, who thereupon resigned himself to quiet slumbers.
His mistress knew no such relief. Excitement had dreadfully aggravated her disorder, at a time when it was needful to banish even thought as far as possible. Pain effectually banished it now, and Barby, coming in a little after Mr. Thorn had gone, found her quite unable to speak, and scarce able to breathe, from agony. Barby's energies and fainting remedies were again put in use, but pain reigned triumphant for hours;
and when its hard rule was at last abated, Fleda was able to do nothing but sleep like a child for hours more.
Towards a late tea-time she was at last awake, and carrying on a very one-sided conversation with Rolf, her own lips being called upon for little more than a smile now and then. King, not able to be in her lap, had curled himself up upon a piece of his mistress's dress, and as close within the circle of her arms as possible, where Fleda's hand and his head were on terms of mutual satisfaction.
"I thought you wouldn't permit a dog to lie in your lap," said Marion.
Do you remember that?" said Fleda, with a smile. "Ah, I have grown tender-hearted, Marion, since I have known what it was to want comfort myself. I have come to the conclusion that it is best to let everything have all the enjoyment it can in the circumstances. King crawled into my lap one day when I had not spirits enough to turn him out, and he has kept the place ever since. Little King!" — In answer to which word of intelligence, King looked in her face and wagged his tail, and then earnestly endeavoured to lick all her fingers, which, however, was a piece of comfort she would not give him.
"Fleda," said Barby, putting her head in, "I wish you'd just step out here and tell me which cheese you'd like to have cut."
"What a fool !" said Marion. "Let her cut them all if she likes."
"She is no fool," said Fleda. She thought Barby's punctiliousness, however, a little ill-timed, as she rose from her sofa, and went into the kitchen.
"Well, you _do_ look as if you wa'n't good for nothing but to be taken care of," said Barby. "I wouldn't have riz you up if it hadn't been just tea-time, and I knowed you couldn't stay quiet much longer;" and, with a look which explained her tactics, she put into Fleda's hand a letter, directed to her aunt.
"Philetus give it to me," she said, without a glance at Fleda's face; "he said it was give to him by a spry little shaver, who wa'n't a mind to tell nothin' about himself."
"Thank you, Barby!" was Fleda's most grateful return, and summoning her aunt up stairs, she took her into her own room, and locked the door before she gave her the letter, which Barby's shrewdness and delicacy had taken such care should not reach its owner in a wrong way. Fleda watched her as her eye ran over the paper, and caught it as it fell from her fingers.
"My dear wife, "That villain Thorn has got a handle of me which he will not fail to use — you know it all, I suppose, by this time. It is true that in an evil hour, long ago, when greatly pressed, I did what I thought I should surely undo in a few days. The time never came — I don't know why he has let it lie so long, but he has taken it up now, and he will push it to the extreme. There is but one thing left for me — I shall not see you again. The rascal would never let me rest, I know, in any spot that calls itself American ground.
"You will do better without me than with me.
"R. R."
Fleda mused over the letter for several minutes, and then touched her aunt, who had fallen on a chair, with her head sunk in her hands.
"What does he mean?" said Mrs. Rossitur, looking up with a perfectly colourless face.
"To leave the country."
"Are you sure? Is that it?" said Mrs. Rossitur, rising and looking over the words again. "He would do anything, Fleda."
"That is what he means, aunt Lucy; don't you see he says he could not be safe anywhere in America?"
Mrs. Rossitur stood eyeing with intense eagerness, for a minute or two, the note in her niece's hand.
"Then he is gone! now that it is all settled! — And we don't know where — and we can't get word to him!"
Her cheek, which had a little brightened, became perfectly white again.
"He isn't gone yet — he can't be — he cannot have left Queechy till to-day — he will be in New York for several days yet, probably."
"New York? — it may be Boston!"
"No, he would be more likely to go to New York — I am sure he would — he is accustomed to it."
"We might write to both places," said poor Mrs. Rossitur. "I will do it, and send them off at once."
"But he might not get the letters," said Fleda, thoughtfully;
"he might not dare to ask at the post-office."
His wife looked at that possibility, and then wrung her hands.
"Oh, why didn't he give us a clue?"
Fleda put an arm round her affectionately, and stood thinking;
stood trembling, might as well be said, for she was too weak to be standing at all.
"What can we do, dear Fleda?" said Mrs. Rossitur, in great distress, "Once out of New York, and we can get nothing to him. If he only knew that there is no need, and that it is all over!"
"We must do everything, aunt Lucy," said Fleda, thoughtfully;
"and I hope we shall succeed yet. We will write, but I think the most hopeful other thing we could do, would be to put advertisements in the newspapers — he would be very likely to see them."
"Advertisements! But you couldn't — what would you put in?"
"Something that would catch his eye, and nobody's else; that is easy, aunt Lucy."
"But there is nobody to put them in, Fleda; you said uncle Orrin was going to Boston?"
"He wasn't going there till next week, but he was to be in Philadelphia a few days before that; the letter might miss him."
"Mr. Plumfield! — couldn't he?"
But Fleda shook her head.
"Wouldn't do, aunt Lucy: he would do all he could, but he don't know New York, nor the papers; he wouldn't know how to manage it; he don't know uncle Rolf; I shouldn't like to trust it to him."
"Who, then? There isn't a creature we could ask."
Fleda laid her cheek to her poor aunt's, and said, — "I'll do it."
"But you must be in New York to do it, dear Fleda — you can't do it here."
"I will go to New York."
"When?"
"To-morrow morning."
"But, dear Fleda, you can't go alone! I can't let you, and you're not fit to go at all, my poor child!" and between conflicting feelings Mrs. Rossitur sat down and wept without measure.
"Listen, aunt Lucy," said Fleda, pressing a hand on her shoulder; "listen, and don't cry so. I'll go and make all right, if efforts can do it. I am not going alone — I'll get Seth to go with me, and I can sleep in the cars, and rest nicely in the steamboat. I shall feel happy and well when I know that I am leaving you easier, and doing all that can be done to bring uncle Rolf home. Leave me to manage, and don't say anything to Marion — it is one blessed thing that she need not know anything about all this. I shall feel better than if I were at home, and had trusted this business to any other hands."
"You are the blessing of my life," said Mrs. Rossitur.
"Cheer up, and come down and let us have some tea," said Fleda, kissing her; "I feel as if that would make me up a little; and then I'll write the letters. I sha'n't want but very little baggage; there'll be nothing to pack up."
Philetus was sent up the hill with a note to Seth Plumfield, and brought home a favourable answer. Fleda thought, as she went to rest, that it was well the mind's strength could sometimes act independently of its servant, the body, — hers felt so very shattered and unsubstantial.
CHAPTER XIV.
"I thank you for your company; but, good faith, I had as lief have been myself alone."
AS YOU LIKE IT.
The first thing next morning, Seth Plumfield came down to say that he had seen Dr. Quackenboss the night before, and had chanced to find out that he was going to New York, too, this very day; and knowing that the doctor would be just as safe an escort as himself, Seth had made over the charge of his cousin to him; "calculating," he said, "that it would make no difference to Fleda, and that he had better stay at home with his mother."
Fleda said nothing, and looked as little as possible of her disappointment, and her cousin went away wholly unsuspecting of it.
"Seth Plumfield ha'n't done a smarter thing than that in a good while," Barby remarked, satirically, as he was shutting the door. "I should think he'd ha' hurt himself."
"I dare say the doctor will take good care of me," said Fleda;
"as good as he knows how."
"Men beat all!" said Barby, impatiently. "The little sense there is into them."
Fleda's sinking heart was almost ready to echo the sentiment;
but nobody knew it.
Coffee was swallowed, her little travelling-bag and bonnet on the sofa — all ready. Then came the doctor.
"My dear Miss Ringgan, I am most happy of this delightful opportunity — I had supposed you were located at home for the winter. This is a sudden start."
"Is it sudden to you, Dr. Quackenboss?" said Fleda.
"Why — a — not disagreeably so," said the doctor, smiling;
"nothing could be that in the present circumstances — but I — a — I hadn't calculated upon it for much of a spell beforehand."
Fleda was vexed, and looked — only unconversable.
"I suppose," said the doctor, after a pause, "that we have not much time to waste — a — in idle moments. Which route do you intend to travel?"
"I was thinking to go by the North River, Sir."
"But the ice has collected, I am afraid."
"At Albany, I know; but when I came up, there was a boat every other day, and we could get there in time by the stage — this is her day."
"But we have had some pretty tight weather since, if you remember," said the doctor; "and the boats have ceased to connect with the stage. We shall have to go to Greenfield to take the Housatonic, which will land us at Bridgeport on the Sound."
"Have we time to reach Greenfield this morning?"
"Oceans of time," said the doctor, delightedly; "I've got my team here, and they're jumping out of their skins with having nothing to do, and the weather — they'll carry us there as spry as grasshoppers — now, if you're ready, my dear Miss Ringgan."
There was nothing more but to give and receive those speechless lip-messages that are out of the reach of words, and Mrs. Rossitur's half-spoken last charge, to take care of herself; and with these seals upon her mission, Fleda set forth and joined the doctor, thankful for one foil to curiosity in the shape of a veil, and only wishing that there were any invented screen that she could place between her and hearing.
"I hope your attire is of a very warm description," said the doctor, as he helped her into the wagon; "it friz pretty hard last night, and I don't think it has got out of the notion yet. If I had been consulted in any other— a — form, than that of a friend, I should have disapprobated, if you'll excuse me, Miss Ringgan's travelling again before her 'Rose of Cassius'
there was in blow. I hope you have heard no evil tidings? Dr.
— a — Gregory, I hope, is not taken ill?"
"I hope not, Sir," said Fleda.
"He didn't look like it. A very hearty old gentleman. Not very old either, I should judge. Was he the brother of your mother or your father?"
"Neither, Sir."
"Ah! — I misunderstood — I thought, but of course I was mistaken — I thought I heard you speak to him under the title of uncle. But that is a title we sometimes give to elderly people as a term of familiarity; there is an old fellow that works for me, he has been a long time in our family, and we always call him 'uncle Jenk.' "
Fleda was ready to laugh, cry, and be angry, in a breath. She looked straight before her, and was mum.
"That 'Rose of Cassius' is a most exquisite thing," said the doctor, recurring to the cluster of bare bushy stems in the corner of the garden. "Did Mr. Rossitur bring it with him when he came to his present residence?"
"Yes, Sir."
"Where is Mr. Rossitur now?"
Fleda replied, with a jump of her heart, that business affairs had obliged him to be away for a few days.
"And when does he expect to return?" said the doctor.
"I hope he will be home as soon as I am," said Fleda.
"Then you do not expect to remain long in the city this time?"
"I shall not have much of a winter at home if I do," said Fleda. "We are almost at January."
"Because," said the doctor, "in that case I should have no higher gratification than in attending upon your motions. I — a — beg you to believe, my dear Miss Ringgan, that it would afford me the — a — most particular — it would be most particularly grateful to me to wait upon you to — a — the confines of the world."
Fleda hastened to assure her officious friend that the time of her return was altogether uncertain, resolving rather to abide a guest with Mrs. Pritchard than to have Dr. Quackenboss hanging upon her motions every day of her being there. But, in the meantime, the doctor got upon Captain Rossitur's subject, then came to Mr. Thorn, and then wanted to know the exact nature of Mr. Rossitur's business affairs in Michigan, through all which matters poor Fleda had to run the gauntlet of questions, interspersed with gracious speeches which she could bear even less well. She was extremely glad to reach the cars, and take refuge in seeming sleep from the mongrel attentions, which, if for the most part prompted by admiration, owned so large a share of curiosity. Her weary head and heart would fain have courted the reality of sleep, as a refuge from more painful thoughts, and a feeling of exhaustion that could scarcely support itself; but the restless roar and jumble of the rail-cars put it beyond her power. How long the hours were — how hard to wear out, with no possibility of a change of position that would give rest! Fleda would not even raise her head when they stopped, for fear of being talked to; how trying that endless noise to her racked nerves! It came to an end at last, though Fleda would not move for fear they might be only taking in wood and water.
"Miss Ringgan!" said the doctor in her ear, "my dear Miss Ringgan, we are here" — "Are we?" said Fleda, looking up; "what other name has the place, doctor?"
"Why, Bridgeport," said the doctor; "we're at Bridgeport. Now we have leave to exchange conveyances. A man feels constrained after a prolonged length of time in a place. How have you enjoyed the ride?"
"Not very well — it has seemed long. I am glad we are at the end of it."
But as she rose and threw back her veil, the doctor looked startled.
"My dear Miss Ringgan, are you faint?"
"No, Sir."
"You are not well, indeed! — I am very sorry — the ride has been — Take my arm! — Ma'am," said the doctor, touching a black satin cloak which filled the passage-way, "will you have the goodness to give this lady a passport?"
But the black satin cloak preferred a straightforward manner of doing this, so their egress was somewhat delayed. Happily faintness was not the matter.
"My dear Miss Ringgan," said the doctor, as they reached the ground and the outer air, "what was it? — the stove too powerful? You are looking — you are of a dreadfully delicate appearance!"
"I had a headache yesterday," said Fleda; "it always leaves me with a disagreeable reminder the next day. I am not ill."
But he looked frightened, and hurried her, as fast as he dared, to the steamboat; and there proposed half a dozen restoratives, the simplest of which Fleda took, and then sought delicious rest from him and from herself on the cushions of a settee. Delicious! — though she was alone, in the cabin of a steamboat, with strange forms and noisy tongues around her, the closed eyelids shut it out all; and she had time but for one resting thought of "patient continuance in well-doing," and one happy heart-look up to Him who has said that he cares for his children, a look that laid her anxieties down there — when past misery and future difficulty faded away before a sleep that lasted till the vessel reached her moorings and was made fast.
She was too weary and faint even to think during the long drive up to Bleecker Street. She was fain to let it all go — the work she had to do, and the way she must set about it, and rest in the assurance that nothing could be done that night.
She did not so much as hear Dr. Quackenboss's observations, though she answered a few of them, till, at the door, she was conscious of his promising to see her to-morrow, and of her instant conclusion to take measures to see nobody.
How strange everything seemed! She walked through the familiar hall, feeling as if her acquaintance with every old thing was broken. There was no light in the back parlour, but a comfortable fire.
"Is my — is Dr. Gregory at home?" she asked of the girl who had let her in.
"No, Ma'am; he hasn't got back from Philadelphia."
"Tell Mrs. Pritchard a lady wants to see her."
Good Mrs. Pritchard was much more frightened than Dr.
Quackenboss had been when she came into the back parlour to see "a lady," and found Fleda in. the great arm-chair, taking off her things. She poured out questions, wonderings, and lamentings, not "in a breath," but in a great many; quite forgot to be glad to see her, she looked so dreadfully; and "what had been the matter?" Fleda answered her — told of yesterday's illness and to-day's journey; and met all her shocked inquiries with so composed a face, and such a calm smile and bearing, that Mrs. Pritchard was almost persuaded not to believe her eyes.
"My uncle is not at home?"
"O no, Miss Fleda! I suppose he's in Philadelphy — but his motions is so little to be depended on, that I never know when I have him; maybe he'll stop going through to Boston, and maybe no, and I don't know when; so anyhow I had to have a fire made, and this room all ready; and aint it lucky it was ready for you to-night? — and now he aint here, you can have the great chair all to yourself, and make yourself comfortable — we can keep warmer here, I guess, than you can in the country," said the good housekeeper, giving some skilful admonishing touches to the fire; — "and you must just sit there and read and rest, and see if you can't get back your old looks again. If I thought it was _that_ you came for, I'd be happy. I never did see such a change in any one in five days."
She stood looking down at her guest with a face of very serious concern, evidently thinking much more than she chose to give utterance to.
"I am tired, Mrs. Pritchard," said Fleda, smiling up at her.
"I wish you had somebody to take care of you, Miss Fleda, that wouldn't let you tire yourself. It's a sin to throw your strength away so — and you don't care for looks, nor nothing else when it's for other people. You're looking just as handsome, too, for all," she said, her mouth giving way a little, as she stooped down to take off Fleda's overshoes;
"but that's only because you can't help it. Now, what is there you'd like to have for supper? — just say, and you shall have it — whatever would seem best — because I mightn't hit the right thing."
Fleda declared her indifference to everything but a cup of tea, and her hostess bustled away to get that, and tax her own ingenuity and kindness for the rest. And, leaning her weary head back in the lounge, Fleda tried to think — but it was not time yet; she could only feel — feel what a sad change had come over her since she had sat there last — shut her eyes and wish she could sleep again.
But Mrs. Pritchard's hospitality must be gone through with first.
The nicest of suppers was served in the bright little parlour, and her hostess was a compound of care and good-will; nothing was wanting to the feast but a merry heart. Fleda could not bring that, so her performance was unsatisfactory, and Mrs.
Pritchard was distressed. Fleda went to her own room, promising better doings to-morrow.
She awoke in the morning to the full burden of care and sorrow which sheer weakness and weariness the day before had in part laid down — to a quicker sense of the state of things than she had had yet. The blasting evil that had fallen upon them — Fleda writhed on her bed when she thought of it. The sternest, cruellest, most inflexible grasp of distress. Poverty may be borne, death may be sweetened, even to the survivors; but _disgrace_ — Fleda hid her head, as if she would shut the idea out with the light. And the ruin it had wrought! Affection killed at the root — her aunt's happiness withered for this world — Hugh's life threatened — the fair name of his family gone — the wear and weariness of her own spirit — but that had hardly a thought. Himself! — oh! no one could tell what a possible wreck, now that self-respect and the esteem of others — those two safeguards of character — were lost to him. "So much security has any woman in a man without religion;" she remembered those words of her aunt Miriam now; and she thought, if Mr. Thorn had sought an ill wind to blow, upon his pretensions, he could not have pitched them better. What fairer promise, without religion, could be than her uncle had given! Reproach had never breathed against his name, and no one less than those who knew him best could fancy that he had ever given it occasion. And who could have more at stake? — and the stake was lost — that was the summing up thought.
No, it was not — for Fleda's mind presently sprang beyond — to the remedy; and after a little swift and earnest flitting about of thought over feasibilities and contingencies, she jumped up, and dressed herself with a prompt energy which showed a mind made up to its course. And yet when she came down to the parlour, though bending herself with nervous intentness to the work she had to do, her fingers and her heart were only stayed in their trembling by some of the happy assurances she had been fleeing to — "COMMIT THY WORKS UNTO THE LORD, AND ALL THY THOUGHTS SHALL BE ESTABLISHED."
"IN ALL THY WAYS ACKNOWLEDGE HIM: HE SHALL DIRECT THY PATHS."
— Assurances, not, indeed, that her plans should meet with success, but that they should have the issue best for them.
She was early, but the room was warm, and in order, and the servant had left it. Fleda sought out paper and pencil, and sat down to fashion the form of an advertisement — the first thing to be done. She had no notion how difficult a thing, till she came to do it.
"_R. R. is entreated to communicate with his niece at the old place in Bleecker Street, on business of the greatest importance_."
"It will not do," said Fleda, to herself, as she sat and looked at it — "there is not enough to catch his eye, and there is _too much_, if it caught anybody else's eye — 'R. R.', and 'his niece,' and 'Bleecker Street,' — that would tell plain enough."
"_Dear uncle, F. has followed you here on business of the greatest importance. Pray let her see you; she is at the old place_."
"It will not do," thought Fleda, again — "there is still less to catch his eye — I cannot trust it. And if I were to put 'Queechy' over it, that would give the clue to the Evelyns, and everybody. But I had better risk anything rather than his seeing it."
The miserable needlessness of the whole thing, the pitiful weighing of sorrow against sorrow, and shame against shame, overcame her for a little; and then, dashing away the tears she had no time for, and locking up the strong-box of her heart, she took her pencil again.
"_Queechy_.
"_Let me see you at the old place. I have come here on urgent business for you. Do not deny me, for H—'s sake!_"
With a trifle of alteration, she thought this would do; and went on to make a number of fair copies of it for so many papers. This was done, and all traces of it out of the way before Mrs. Pritchard came in and the breakfast; and after bracing herself with coffee, though the good housekeeper was still sadly dissatisfied with her indifference to some more substantial brace in the shape of chickens and ham, Fleda prepared herself inwardly and outwardly to brave the wind and the newspaper offices, and set forth. It was a bright, keen day; she was sorry; she would it had been cloudy. It seemed as if she could not hope to escape some eyes in such an atmosphere.
She went to the library first, and there requested the librarian, whom she knew, to bring her from the reading-room the files of morning and evening papers. They were many more than she had supposed; she had not near advertisements enough.
Paper and ink were at hand, however, and making carefully her list of the various offices, morning and evening separate, she wrote out a copy of the notice for each of them.
The morning was well on by the time she could leave the library. It was yet far from the fashionable hour, however, and sedulously shunning the recognition of anybody, in hopes that it would be one step towards her escaping theirs, she made her way down the bright thoroughfare as far as the City Hall, and then crossed over the Park and plunged into a region where it was very little likely she would see a face that she knew. She saw nothing else either that she knew; in spite of having studied the map of the city in the library, she was forced several times to ask her way, as she visited office after office, of the evening papers first, till she had placed her notice with each one of them. Her courage almost failed her — her heart did quite, after two or three. It was a trial from which her whole nature shrank, to go among the people, to face the eyes, to exchange talk with the lips that were at home in those purlieus; look at them she did not. Making her slow way through the choked narrow streets, where the mere confusion of business was bewildering — very, to any one come from Queechy; among crowds, of what mixed and doubtful character, hurrying along and brushing with little ceremony past her; edging by loitering groups that filled the whole sidewalk, or perhaps edging through them — groups whose general type of character was sufficiently plain and _un_mixed;
entering into parley with clerk after clerk, who looked at such a visitor as an anomaly — poor Fleda almost thought so too, and shrank within herself; venturing hardly her eyes beyond her thick veil, and shutting her ears resolutely as far as possible to all the dissonant rough voices that helped to assure her she was where she ought not to be. Sometimes she felt that it was _impossible_ to go on and finish her task; but a thought or two nerved her again to plunge into another untried quarter, or make good her entrance to some new office through a host of loungers and waiting newsboys collected round the door. Sometimes, in utter discouragement, she went on and walked to a distance and came back, in the hope of a better opportunity. It was a long business; and she often had to wait. The end of her list was reached at last, and the paper was thrown away; but she did not draw free breath till she had got to the west side of Broadway again, and turned her back upon them all.
It was late then, and the street was thinned of a part of its gay throng. Completely worn in body as well as mind, with slow faltering steps, Fleda moved on among those still left;
looking upon them with a curious eye, as if they and she belonged to different classes of beings; so very far her sobered and saddened spirit seemed to herself from their stir of business and gaiety; if they had been a train of lady-flies or black ants, Fleda would hardly have felt that she had less in common with them. It was a weary, long way up to Bleecker Street, as she was forced to travel it.
The relief was unspeakable to find herself within her uncle's door, with the sense that her dreaded duty was done, and well and thoroughly. Now her part was to be still and wait. But with the relief came also a reaction from the strain of the morning. Before her weary feet had well mounted the stairs, her heart gave up its control; and she locked herself in her room to yield to a helpless outpouring of tears which she was utterly unable to restrain, though conscious that long time could not pass before she would be called to dinner. Dinner had to wait.
"Miss Fleda," said the housekeeper, in a vexed tone, when the meal was half over — "I didn't know you ever did anything wrong."
"You were sadly mistaken, Mrs. Pritchard," said Fleda, half lightly, half sadly.
"You're looking not a bit better than last night, and, if anything, rather worse," Mrs. Pritchard went on. "It isn't right, Miss Fleda. You oughtn't to ha' set the first step out of doors, I know you oughtn't, this blessed day; and you've been on your feet these seven hours — and you show it! You're just ready to drop."
"I will rest to-morrow," said Fleda, "or try to."
"You are fit for nothing but bed," said the housekeeper — "and you've been using yourself, Miss Fleda, as if you had the strength of an elephant. Now, do you think you've been doing right?"
Fleda would have made some cheerful answer, but she was not equal to it; she had lost all command of herself, and she dropped knife and fork to burst into a flood of exceeding tears. Mrs. Pritchard, equally astonished and mystified, hurried questions, apologies, and consolations, one upon another; and made up her mind that there was something mysterious on foot, about which she had better ask no questions. Neither did she from that time. She sealed up her mouth, and contented herself with taking the best care of her guest that she possibly could. Needed enough, but all of little avail.
The reaction did not cease with that day. The next Sunday was spent on the sofa, in a state of utter prostration. With the necessity for exertion the power had died. Fleda could only lie upon the cushions and sleep helplessly, while Mrs.
Pritchard sat by, anxiously watching her; curiosity really swallowed up in kind feeling. Monday was little better; but towards the after part of the day, the stimulant of anxiety began to work again, and Fleda sat up to watch for a word from her uncle. But none came, and Tuesday morning distressed Mrs.
Pritchard with its want of amendment. It was not to be hoped for, Fleda knew, while this fearful watching lasted. Her uncle might not have seen the advertisement — he might not have got her letter — he might be even then setting sail to quit home for ever. And she could do nothing but wait. Her nerves were alive to every stir; every touch of the bell made her tremble;
it was impossible to read, to lie down, to be quiet or still anywhere. She had set the glass of expectancy, for one thing, in the distance: and all things else were a blur or a blank.
They had sat down to dinner that Tuesday, when a ring at the door, which had made her heart jump, was followed — yes, it was — by the entrance of the maid-servant holding a folded bit of paper in her hand. Fleda did not wait to ask whose it was — she seized it and saw — and sprang away up stairs. It was a sealed scrap of paper, that had been the back of a letter, containing two lines without signature.
"I will meet you _at Dinah's_ — if you come there alone about sundown."
Enough! Dinah was an old black woman who once had been a very attached servant in Mr. Rossitur's family, and, having married and become a widow years ago, had set up for herself in the trade of a washerwoman, occupying an obscure little tenement out towards Chelsea. Fleda had rather a shadowy idea of the locality, though remembering very well sundry journeys of kindness she and Hugh had made to it in days gone by. But she recollected it was in Sloman Street, and she knew she could find it; and dropping upon her knees, poured out thanks too deep to be uttered, and too strong to be even thought, without a convulsion of tears. Her dinner after that was but a mental thanksgiving — she was hardly conscious of anything beside — and a thankful rejoicing for all her weary labours. Their weariness was sweet to her now. Let her but see him — the rest was sure.
CHAPTER XV.
"How well appaid she was her bird to find!"
SIDNEY.
Fleda counted the minutes till it wanted an hour of sundown, and then, avoiding Mrs. Pritchard, made her escape out of the house. A long walk was before her, and the latter part of it through a region which she wished to pass while the light was good. And she was utterly unable to travel at any but a very gentle rate; so she gave herself plenty of time.
It was a very bright afternoon, and all the world was astir.
Fleda shielded herself with a thick veil, and went up one of the narrow streets, not daring to venture into Broadway, and passing Waverly Place, which was almost as bright, turned down Eighth Street. A few blocks now, and she would be out of all danger of meeting any one that knew her. She drew her veil close, and hurried on. But the proverb saith, "A miss is as good as a mile," and with reason; for if fate wills, the chances make nothing. As Fleda set her foot down to cross Fifth Avenue, she saw Mr. Carleton on the other side coming up from Waverly Place. She went as slowly as she dared, hoping that he would pass without looking her way, or be unable to recognize her through her thick wrapper. In vain — she soon saw that she was known — he was waiting for her, and she must put up her veil and speak to him.
"Why, I thought you had left New York," said he — "I was told so."
"I had left it — I have left it, Sir," said Fleda — "I have only come back for a day or two." — "Have you been ill?" he said, with a sudden change of tone, the light in his eye, and smile, giving place to a very marked gravity.
Fleda would have answered with a half smile, but such a sickness of heart came over her, that speech failed, and she was very near bursting into tears. Mr. Carleton looked at her earnestly a moment, and then put the hand which Fleda had forgotten he still held upon his arm, and began to walk forward gently with her. Something in the grave tenderness with which this was done, reminded Fleda irresistibly of the times when she had been a child under his care; and, somehow, her thoughts went off on a tangent back to the further days of her mother, and father, and grandfather, the other friends from whom she had had the same gentle protection, which now there was no one in the world to give her. And their images did never seem more winning fair than just then — when their place was left most especially empty. Her uncle she had never looked up to in the same way, and whatever stay he had been was cut down. Her aunt leaned upon _her;_ and Hugh had always been more of a younger than an elder brother. The quick contrast of those old happy childish days was too strong; the glance back at what she had had, made her feel the want. Fleda blamed herself, reasoned and fought with herself; but she was weak in mind and body, her nerves were unsteady yet, her spirits unprepared for any encounter or reminder of pleasure;
and though vexed and ashamed, she _could_ not hold her head up, and she could not prevent tear after tear from falling as they went along; she could only hope that nobody saw them.
Nobody spoke of them. But then nobody said anything; and the silence at last frightened her into rousing herself. She checked her tears and raised her head; she ventured no more;