She felt that if she allowed herself any softness or yielding at this moment she would spoil her spotless record of self-control and weep in maudlin fashion in Becky's arms.
So in self-defense, she spoke with coldness. "I never wear borrowed clothes, my dear."
Becky, somewhat dishevelled and warm from her exertions, sat down to argue it. "I haven't had it on. And I'd love to give it to you----"
"My dear, of course not. It's very generous of you--very----" Aunt Claudia buried her face suddenly in the pillows and sobbed stormily.
Becky stood up. "Oh, Aunt Claudia," she gasped. Then with the instinctive knowledge that silence was best, she gave her aunt a little pat on the shoulder and crept from the room.
She crept back presently and packed the crepe house-coat with the other things. Then, since Aunt Claudia made no sign, she went down-stairs to the kitchen.
Mandy, the cook, who had a complexion like an old copper cent, and who wore a white Dutch cap in place of the traditional bandana, was cutting corn from the cob for fritters.
"If you'll make a cup of tea," Becky said, "I'll take it up to Aunt Claudia. She's lying down."
"Is you goin' wid her?" Mandy asked.
"To New York? No. She'll want Truxton all to herself, Mandy."
"Well, I hopes she has him," Mandy husked an ear of corn viciously. "I ain' got my boy. He hol's his haid so high, he ain' got no time fo'
his ol' Mammy."
"You know you are proud of him, Mandy."
"I ain' sayin' I is, and I ain' sayin' I isn't. But dat Daisy down the road, she ac' like she own him."
"Oh, Daisy? Is he in love with her?"
"Love," with withering scorn, "_love_? Ain' he got somefin' bettah to do than lovin' when he's jes' fit and fought fo' Uncle Sam?" She beat the eggs for her batter as if she had Daisy's head under the whip. "He fit and fought fo' Uncle Sam," she repeated, "and now he comes home and camps hisse'f on Daisy's do'-step."
Against the breeze of such high indignation, any argument would be blown away. Becky changed the subject hastily. "Mandy," she asked, "are you making corn fritters?"
"I is----"
"What else for lunch?"
"An omlec----"
"Mandy, I'm so hungry I could eat a house----"
"You look it," Mandy told her; "effen I was you, I'd eat and git fat."
"It isn't fashionable to be fat, Mandy."
"Skeletums may be in style," said Mandy, breaking eggs for the omelette, "but I ain' ever found good looks in bones."
"Don't you like _my_ bones, Mandy?"
"You ain't got none, honey."
"You called me a skeleton."
The kettle boiled. "Effen I called you a skeletum," Mandy said as she placed a cup and saucer on a small napkined tray, "my min' was on dat-ar Daisy. You ain' got no bones, Miss Becky. But Daisy, she's got a neck like a picked tukkey, and her shoulder-blades stan' out like wings."
III Becky went to the train with her aunt. George Dalton drove Madge down and passed the old surrey on the way.
Later Madge met Mrs. Beaufort and Becky on the station platform, and it was when Dalton settled her in her chair in the train that she said, "She's a darling. Keep her on a pedestal, Georgie----"
"You're a good sport," he told her; "you know you'd hate it if I did."
"I shouldn't. I'd like to think of you on your knees----"
It was time for him to leave her. She gave him her hand. "Until we meet again, Georgie."
Her eyes were cool and smiling. Yet later as she looked out on the flying hills, there was trouble in them. There had been a time when Dalton had seemed to square with her girlish dreams.
And now, there was no one to warn this other girl with dreams in her eyes. George was not a vulture, he was simply a marauding bee----!
Becky was already in the surrey when George came back, and Calvin was gathering up his reins.
"Oh, look here, I wish you'd let me drive you up, Miss Bannister,"
George said, sparkling; "there's no reason, is there, why you must ride alone?"
"Oh, no."
"Then you will?"
Her hesitation was slight. "I should like it."
"And can't we drive about a bit? You'll show me the old places? It is such a perfect day. I hope you haven't anything else to do."
She had not. "I'll go with Mr. Dalton, Calvin."
Calvin, who had watched over more than one generation of Bannister girls, and knew what was expected of them, made a worried protest.
"Hit's gwine rain, Miss Becky."
Dalton dismissed him with a wave of the hand. "I won't let her get wet," he lifted Becky from the surrey and walked with her to his car.
Kemp, who had come down in the house truck with Madge's trunks, stood stiff and straight by the door. Being off with Miss MacVeigh he was on with Miss Bannister. Girls might come and girls might go in his master's life, but Kemp had an air of going on forever.
When he had seated Becky, Dalton stepped back and gave hurried instructions.
"At four, Kemp," he said, "or if you are later, wait until we come."
"Very well, sir." Kemp stood statuesquely at attention until the car whirled on. Then he sat down on the station platform, and talked to the agent. He was no longer a servant but a man.
As the big car whirled up the hill, Becky, looking out upon the familiar landscape, saw it with new eyes. There was a light upon it which had never been for her on sea or land. She had not believed that in all the world there could be such singing, blossoming radiance.
They drove through the old mill town and the stream was bright under the willows. They stopped on the bridge for a moment to view the shining bend.
"There are old chimneys under the vines," Becky said; "doesn't it seem dreadful to think of all those dead houses----"
George gave a quick turn. "Why think of them? You were not made to think of dead houses, you were made to live."
On and on they went, up the hills and down into the valleys, between rail fences which were a riot of honeysuckle, and with the roads in places rough. Under their wheels, with the fields gold with stubble, the sky a faint blue, with that thick look on the horizon.
George talked a great deal about himself. Perhaps if he had listened instead to Becky he might have learned things which would have surprised him. But he really had very interesting things to tell, and Becky was content to sit in silence and watch his hands on the wheel.
They were small hands, and for some tastes a bit too plump and well-kept, but Becky found no fault with them. She felt that she could sit there forever, and watch his hands and listen to his clear quick voice.
At last George glanced at the little clock which hung in front of him.
"Look here," he said, "I told Kemp to have tea for us at a place which I found once when I walked in the woods. A sort of summer house which looks towards Monticello. Do you know it?"
"Yes. Pavilion Hill. It's on Randy Paine's plantation--King's Crest."
"Then you've been there?"
"A thousand times with Randy."
"I thought it was Waterman's. We shan't be jailed as trespassers, shall we?"
"No. But how could you tell your man to have tea for us when you didn't know that I'd be--willing?"
"But I did--know----"
A little silence, then "How?"
"Because when I put my mind on a thing I usually get my way."
She sat very still. He bent down to her. "You're not angry?"
"No." Her cheeks were flaming. She was thrilled by his masterfulness.
No man had ever spoken to her like that. She was, indeed, having her first experience of ardent, impassioned pursuit. So might young Juliet have given ear to Romeo. And if Romeo had been a Georgie-Porgie, then alas, poor Juliet!
The Pavilion had been built a hundred and fifty years before of cedar logs. There had been a time when Thomas Jefferson had walked over to drink not tea, but something stronger with dead and gone Paines. Its four sides were open, but the vines formed a curtain which gave within a soft gloom. They approached it from the east side, getting out of their car and climbing the hill from the roadside. They found Kemp with everything ready. The kettle was boiling, and the tea measured into the Canton teapot which stood in its basket---- "Aren't you glad you came?" Dalton asked. "Kemp, when you've poured the tea, you can look after the car."
The wind, rising, tore the dry leaves from the trees. Kemp, exiled, as it were, from the Pavilion, sat in the big car and watched the gathering blackness. Finally he got out and put up the curtains.
Everything would be ready when Dalton came. He knew better, however, than to warn his master. George was apt to be sharp when his plans were spoiled.
And now throughout the wooded slope there was the restless movement of nature disturbed in the midst of peaceful dreaming. The trees bent and whispered. The birds, flying low, called sharp warnings. A small dog, spurning the leaves, as she followed a path up the west side of the hill, stopped suddenly and looked back at the man who followed her.
"We'll make the Pavilion if we can, old girl," he told her, and as if she understood, she went up and up in a straight line, disregarding the temptation of side tours into bush and bramble.
George and Becky had finished their tea. There had been some rather delectable sweet biscuit which Kemp kept on hand for such occasions, and there was a small round box of glace nuts, which George had insisted that Becky must keep. The box was of blue silk set off by gold lace and small pink roses.
"Blue is your color," George had said as he presented it.
"That's what Randy says."
"You are always talking of Randy."
She looked her surprise. "I've always known him."
"Is he in love with you?"
She set down the box and looked at him. "Randy is only a boy. I am very fond of him. But we aren't either of us--silly."
She brought the last sentence out with such scorn that George had a moment of startled amaze.
Then, recovering, he said with a smile, "Is being in love silly?"
"I think it's rather sacred----"
The word threw him back upon himself. Love was, you understand, to George, a game. And, here was Becky acting as if it were a ritual.
Yet the novelty of her point of view made her seem more than ever adorable. In his heart he found himself saying, "Oh, you lovely, lovely little thing."
But he did not say it aloud. Indeed he, quite unaccountably, found himself unable to say anything, and while he hesitated, there charged up the west hill a panting dog with flapping ears. At the arched opening of the Pavilion she paused and wagged a tentative question.
"It's Nellie Custis----" Becky rose and ran towards her. "Where's your master, darling? _Randy_----"
In response to her call came an eerie cry--the old war cry of the Indian chiefs. Then young Paine came running up. "Becky! Here?
There's going to be a storm. You better get home----"
He stopped short. Dalton was standing by the folding table.
"Hello, Paine," he said, with ease. "We're playing 'Babes in the Wood.'"
"You seem very comfortable," Randy was as stiff as a wooden tobacco sign.
"We are," Becky said. "Mr. Dalton waved his wand like the Arabian nights----"
"My man did it," said Dalton; "he's down there in the car."
Randy felt a sense of surging rage. The Pavilion was his. It was old and vine-covered, and hallowed by a thousand memories. And here was Dalton trespassing with his tables and chairs and his Canton teapot.
What right had George Dalton to bring a Canton teapot on another man's acres?
Becky was pouring tea for him. "Two lumps, Randy?"
"I don't want any tea," he said ungraciously. His eyes were appraising the flame of her cheeks, the light in her eyes. What had Dalton been saying? "I don't want any tea. And there's a storm coming."
All her life Becky had been terrified in a storm. She had cowered and shivered at the first flash of lightning, at the first rush of wind, at the first roll of thunder. And now she sat serene, while the trees waved despairing arms to a furious sky, while blackness settled over the earth, while her ears were assailed by the noise of a thousand guns.
What had come over her? More than anything else, the thing that struck against Randy's heart was this lack of fear in Becky!
IV Of course it was Dalton who took Becky home. There had been a sharp summons to Kemp, who came running up with raincoats, a rush for the car, a hurried "Won't you come with us, Randy?" from Becky, and Randy's curt refusal, and then the final insult from Dalton.
"Kemp will get you home, Paine, when he takes the tea things."
Randy wanted to throw something after him--preferably a tomahawk--as Dalton went down the hill, triumphantly, shielding Becky from the elements.
He watched until a curtain of rain shut them out, but he heard the roar of the motor cutting through the clamor of the storm.
"Well, they're off, sir," said Kemp cheerfully.
He was packing the Canton teapot in its basket and was folding up the chairs and tables. Randy had a sense of outrage. Here he was, a Randolph Paine of King's Crest, left behind in the rain with a man who had his mind on--teapots---- He stood immovable in the arched opening, his arms folded, and with the rain beating in upon him.
"You'll get wet," Kemp reminded him; "it's better on this side, sir."
"I don't mind the rain. I won't melt; I've had two years in France."
"You have, sir?" something in Kemp's voice made Randy turn and look at him. The little man had his arms full of biscuit boxes, and he was gazing at Randy with a light in his eyes which had not been for Dalton.
"I had three years myself. And the best of my life, sir."
Randy nodded. "A lot of us feel that way."
"The fighting," said Kemp, "was something awful. But it was--big--and after it things seem a bit small, sir." He drew a long breath and came back to his Canton teapot and his folding table and his plans for departure.
"I'll be glad to take you in the little car, Mr. Paine."
"No," said Randy; "no, thank you, Kemp. I'll wait here until the storm is over."
Kemp, with a black rubber cape buttoned about his shoulders and standing out over his load like a lady's hoopskirts, bobbed down the path and was gone.
Randy was glad to be alone. He was glad to get wet, he was glad of the roar and of the tumult which matched the tumult in his soul.
Somehow he had never dreamed of this--that somebody would come into Becky's life and take her away---- Nellie Custis shivered and whined. She hated thunder-storms. Randy sat down on the step and she crept close to him. He laid his hand on her head and fear left her--as fear had left Becky in the presence of Dalton.
After that the boy and the dog sat like statues, looking out, and in those tense and terrible moments a new spirit was born in Randolph Paine. Hitherto he had let life bring him what it would. He had scarcely dared hope that it would bring him Becky. But now he knew that if he lost her he would face--chaos---- Well, he would not lose her. Or if he did, it would not be to let her marry a man like Dalton. Surely she wouldn't. She _couldn't_---- But there had been that light in her eyes, that flame in her cheek--that lack of fear--Dalton's air of assurance, the way she had turned to him.
"Oh, God," he said suddenly, out loud, "don't let Dalton have her."
He was shaken by an emotion which bent his head to his knees. Nellie Custis pressed close against him and whined.
"He shan't have her, Nellie. He shan't----"
He burned with the thought of Dalton's look of triumph. Dalton who had carried Becky off, and had left him with Kemp and a Canton teapot.
He recalled Kemp's words. "After it things seem a bit small, sir."
Well, it shouldn't be small for him. It had seemed so big--over there.
So easy to--carry on.
If he only had a fighting chance. If he had only a half of Dalton's money. A little more time in which to get on his feet.
But in the meantime here was Dalton--with his money, his motors, and his masterfulness. And his look of triumph---- In a sudden fierce reaction he sprang to his feet. He stood in the doorway as if defying the future. "Nobody shall take her away from me," he said, "she's mine----"
His arms were folded over his chest, his wet black locks almost hid his eyes. So might some young savage have stood in the long ago, sending his challenge forth to those same hills.
CHAPTER V LITTLE SISTER I It is one thing, however, to fling a challenge to the hills, and another to live up to the high moment. Looking at it afterwards in cold blood, Randy was forced to admit that his chances of beating George Dalton in a race for Becky were small.
There seemed some slight hope, however, in the fact that Becky was a Bannister and ought to know a gentleman when she saw one.
"And Dalton's a--a bounder," said Randy to Nellie Custis.
Nellie Custis, who was as blue-blooded as any Bannister, cocked a sympathetic ear. Cocking an ear with Nellie was a weighty matter. Her ears were big and unmanageable. When she got them up, she kept them there for some time. It was a rather intriguing habit, as it gave her an air of eager attention which wooed confidence.
"He's a bounder," said Randy as if that settled it.
But it did not settle it in the least. A man with an Apollo head may not be a gentleman under his skin, but how are you to prove it? The world, spurning Judy O'Grady, sanctions the Colonel's lady, and their sisterhood becomes socially negligible. Randy should have known that he could not sweep George Dalton away with a word. Perhaps he did know it, but he did not care to admit it.
He and Nellie Custis were in the garage. It had once been a barn, but the boarders had bought cars, so there was now the smell of gasoline where there had once been the sweet scent of hay. And intermittently the air was rent with puffs and snorts and shrieks which drowned the music of that living chorus which has been sung in stables for centuries.
There were three cars. Two of them have nothing to do with this story, but the third will play its part, and merits therefore description.
It was not an expensive car, but it was new and shining, and had a perky snub-nosed air of being ready for anything. It belonged to the genial gentleman who used it without mercy, and thus the little car wove back and forth over the hills like a shuttle, doing its work sturdily, coming home somewhat noisily, and even at rest, seeming to ask for something more to do.
The genial gentleman was very proud of his car. He talked a great deal about it to Randy, and on this particular morning when he came out and found young Paine sitting on a wheelbarrow with Nellie Custis lending him a cocked ear, he grew eloquent.
"Look here, I've been thinking. There ought to be a lot of cars like this in the county."
To Randy the enthusiasms of the genial gentleman were a constant source of amazement. He was always wanting the world to be glad about something. Randy felt that at this moment any assumption of gladness would be a hollow mockery.
"Any man," said the genial gentleman, rubbing a cloth over the enamel of the little car, "any man who would start selling this machine down here would make a fortune."
Randy pricked up his ears.
"How could he make a fortune?"
"Selling cars. Why, the babies cry for them----" he chuckled and rubbed harder.
"How much could he make?" Randy found himself saying.
The genial gentleman named a sum, "Easy."
Randy got up from the wheelbarrow and came over. "Is she really as good as that?"
"Is she really? Oh, say----" the genial gentleman for the next ten minutes dealt in superlatives.
Towards the end, Randy was firing questions at him.
"Could I own a car while I was selling them?"
"Sure--they'd let you have it on installments to be paid for out of your commissions----"
"And I'd have an open field?"
"My dear boy, in a month you could have cars like this running up and down the hills like ants after sugar. They speak for themselves, and they are cheap enough for anybody."
"But it is a horse-riding country, especially back in the hills. They love horse-flesh, you know."
"Oh, they'll get the gasoline bug like the rest of us," said the genial gentleman and slapped him on the back.
Randy winced. He did not like to be slapped on the back. Not at a moment--when he was selling his soul to the devil---- For that was the way he looked at it.
"I shall have to perjure myself," he said to Major Prime later, as they talked it over in the Schoolhouse, "to go through the country telling mine own people to sell their horses and get cars."
"If you don't do it, somebody else will."
"But a man can't be convincing if he doesn't believe in a thing."
"No, of course. But you've got to look at it this way, the world moves, and horses haven't had an easy time. Perhaps it is their moment of emancipation. And just for the sake of a sentiment, a tradition, you can't afford to hold back."
"I can't afford to lose this chance if there is money in it. But it isn't what I had planned."
As he sat there on the step and hugged his knees, every drop of blood in Randy seemed to be urging "Hurry, hurry." He felt as a man might who, running a race, finds another rider neck and neck and strains towards the finish.
To sell cars in order to win Becky seemed absurd on the face of it.
But he would at least be doing something towards solving the problem of self-support, and towards increasing the measure of his own self-respect.
"What had you planned?" the Major was asking.
"Well of course there is the law---- And I like it, but there would be a year or two before I could earn a living---- And I've wanted to write----"
"Write what? Books?"
"Anything," said Randy, explosively, "that would make the world sit up."
"Ever tried it?"
"Yes. At school. I talked to a teacher of mine once about it. He said I had better invent a--pill----"
The Major stared, "A pill?"
Randy nodded. "He didn't quite mean it, of course. But he saw the modern trend. A poet? A poor thing! But hats off to the pillmaker with his multi-millions!"
"Stop that," said the Major.
"Stop what?"
"Blaming the world for its sordidness. There is beauty enough if we look for it."
"None of us has time to look for it. We are too busy trying to sell cars to people who love horses."
II In the end Randy got his car. And after that he, too, might have been seen running shuttle-like back and forth over the red roads. Nellie Custis was usually beside him on the front seat. She took her new honors seriously. For generations back her forbears had loped with flapping ears in the lead of a hunting pack. To be sitting thus on a leather seat and whirled through the air with no need of legs from morning until night required some readjustment on the part of Nellie Custis. But she had always followed where Randy led. And in time she grew to like it, and watched the road ahead with eager eyes, and with her ears perpetually cocked.
Now and then Becky sat beside Randy, with Nellie at her feet. The difference between a ride with Randy and one with George Dalton was, Becky felt, the difference a not unpleasant commonplace and the stuff that dreams are made of.
"It is rather a duck of a car," she had said, the first time he took her out in it.
"Yes, it is," Randy had agreed. "I am getting tremendously fond of her. I have named her 'Little Sister.'"
"Oh, Randy, you haven't."
"Yes, I have. She has such confiding ways. I never believed that cars had human qualities, Becky."
"They are not horses of course."
"Well, they have individual characteristics. You take the three cars in our barn. The Packard reminds one of that stallion we owned three years ago--blooded and off like the wind. The Franklin is a grayhound--and Little Sister is a--duck----"
"Mr. Dalton's car is a--silver ship----"
"Oh, does he call it that?" grimly.
"So----"
"Was it your own--poetic--idea?"
"Yes."
"And you called Little Sister a duck," she groaned. "And when my little duck swims in the wake of his silver ship, and he laughs, do you laugh, too?"
There was a dead silence. Then she said, "Oh, Randy----"
He made his apology like a gentleman. "That was hateful of me, Becky.
I'm sorry----"
"You know I wouldn't laugh, Randy, and neither would he."
"Who?"
"Mr. Dalton."
"Wouldn't what?"
"Laugh."
He hated her defense of young Apollo--but he couldn't let the subject alone.
"You never have any time for me."
"Randy, are you going to scold me for the rest of our ride?"
"Am I scolding?"
"Yes."
"Then I'll stop it and say nice things to you or you won't want to come again."
Yet after that when he saw her in Dalton's car, her words would return to him, and gradually he began to think of her as sailing in a silver ship farther and farther away in a future where he could not follow.
Little Sister was a great comfort in those days. She gave him occupation and she gave him an income. He was never to forget his first sale. He had not found it easy to cry his wares. The Paines of King's Crest had never asked favors of the country folk, or if they had, they had paid generously for what they had received. To go now among them saying, "I have something to sell," carried a sting. There had been nothing practical in Randy's education. He had no equipment with which to meet the sordid questions of bargain and sale.
He had thought of this as he rode over the hills that morning to the house of a young farmer who had been suggested by the genial gentleman as a good prospect. He turned over in his mind the best method of approach. It was a queer thing, he pondered, to visualize himself as a salesman. He wondered how many of the other fellows who had come back looked at it as he did. They had dreamed such dreams of valor, their eyes had seen visions. To Randy when he had enlisted had come a singing sense that the days of chivalry were not dead. He had gone through the war with a laugh on his lips, but with a sense of the sacredness of the crusade in his heart. He had returned--still dreaming--to sell snub-nosed cars to the countryside!
Why, just a year ago----! He remembered a black night of storm, when, hooded like a falcon--he had ridden without a light on his motorcycle, carrying dispatches from the Argonne, and even as he had ridden, he had felt that high sense of heroic endeavor. On the success of his mission depended other lives, the saving of nations--victory----!
And now he, with a million others, was faced by the problem of the day's work. He wondered how the others looked at it--those gallant young knights in khaki who had followed the gleam. Were they, too, grasping at any job that would buy them bread and butter, pay their bills, keep them from living on the bounty of others?
He felt that in some way the thing was all wrong. There should, have been big things for these boys to do. There seemed something insensate in a civilization which would permit a man who wore medals of honor to sell ribbon over a counter, or weigh out beef at a butcher's. Yet he supposed that many of them were doing it. Indeed he knew that some of them were. The butcher's boy, who brought the meat over every morning to King's Crest, wore two decorations, and when Randy had stopped for breakfast supplies, the hero of Belleau Woods had cut off sausages as calmly as he had once bayonetted Huns.
Randy wondered what the butcher's boy was feeling under that apparently stolid surface. Was his horizon bounded by beef and sausages, or did his soul expand with memories of the shoulder-to-shoulder march, the comradeship of the trenches, the laughter and songs? Did his pulses thrill with the thought of the big things he might yet do in these days of peace, or was he content to play safe and snip sausages?
Randy felt that he was not content. It was not that he loved war. But he loved the visions that the war had brought him. There had seemed no limit then to America's achievement. She had been a laggard--he thanked God that he had not been a party to that delay. But when she had come in, she had come in with all her might and main. And her young men had fought and the future of the whole world had been in their hands, and since peace had come the future of the world must still be reckoned in the terms of their glorious youth.
And now, something within Randy began to sing and soar. He felt that here were things to be put on paper--the questions which he flung at himself should be written for other men to read. That was what men needed--questions. Questions which demanded answers not only in words but in deeds. This was a moment for men of high thoughts and high purposes.
And he was selling cars----!
Well, some day he would write. He was writing a little now, at night.
In his room at the top of the Schoolhouse. Yet the things that he had written seemed trivial as he thought of them. What he wanted was to strike a ringing note. To have the fellows say when they read it, "If it is true for him it is true for me."
Yet when one came to think of it, there were really not any "fellows."
Not in the sense that it had been "over there." They were scattered to the four winds, dispersed to the seven seas--the A. E. F. was extinct--as extinct--as the Trumpeter Swan!
And now his thoughts ran fast, and faster. Here was his theme. Where was that glorious company of young men who had once sounded their trumpets to the world? Gone, as the swans were gone--leaving the memory of their whiteness--leaving the memory of their beauty--leaving the memory of their--song---- He wanted to turn back at once. To drive Little Sister at breakneck speed towards pen and paper. But some instinct drove him doggedly towards the matter on hand. One might write masterpieces, but there were cars to be sold.
He sold one----; quite strangely and unexpectedly he found that the transaction was not difficult. The man whom he had come to see was on the front porch and was glad of company. Randy explained his errand.
"It is new business for me. But I've got something to offer you that you'll find you'll want----"
He found that he could say many things truthful about the merits of Little Sister. He had a convincing manner; the young farmer listened.
"Let me take you for a ride," Randy offered, and away they went along the country roads, and through the main streets of the town in less time that it takes to say--"Jack Robinson."
When they came back, the children ran out to see, and Randy took them down the road and back again. "You can carry the whole family," he said, "when you go----"
The man's wife came out. She refused to ride. She was afraid.
But Randy talked her over. "My mother felt like that. But once you are in it is different."
She climbed in, and came back with her face shining.
"I am going to buy the car," her husband said to her.
Randy's heart jumped. Somehow he had felt that it would not really happen. He had had little faith in his qualities as salesman. Yet, after all, it had happened, and he had sold his car.
Riding down the hill, he was conscious of a new sense of achievement.
It was all very well to dream of writing masterpieces. But here was something tangible.
"Nellie," he said, "things are picking up."
Nellie laid her nose on his knee and looked up at him. It had been a long ride, and she was glad they were on the homeward stretch. But she wagged her tail. Nellie knew when things were going well with her master. And when his world went wrong, her sky darkened.
III The sale of one car, however, does not make a fortune. Randy realized as the days went on that if he sold them and sold them and sold them, Dalton would still outdistance him financially.
There remained, therefore, fame, and the story in the back of his mind.
If he could lay a thing like that at Becky's feet! He had the lover's urge towards some heaven-kissing act which should exalt his mistress---- A book for all the world to read--a picture painted with a flaming brush, a statue carved with a magic instrument. It was for Becky that Randy would work and strive hoping that by some divine chance he might draw her to him.
He worked at night until the Major finally remonstrated.
"Do you ever go to bed?"
Randy laughed. "Sometimes."
"Are you writing?"
"Trying to."
"Hard work?"
"I like it,"--succinctly.
The Major smoked for a while in silence. Then he said, "I suppose you don't want to talk about it."
It was a starry night and a still one. The younger boarders had gone for a ride. The older boarders were in bed. The Major was stretched in his long chair. Randy sat as usual on the steps.
"Yes," he said, "I'd like to talk about it. I have a big idea, and I can't put it on paper."
He hugged his knees and talked. His young voice thrilled with the majesty of his conception. Here, he said, was the idea. Once upon a time there had been a race of wonderful swans, with plumage so white that when they rested in flocks on the river banks they made a blanket of snow. Their night was a marvellous thing--they flew so high that the eye of man could not see them--but the sound of their trumpets could be heard. The years passed and the swans came no more to their old haunts. Men had hunted them and killed them--but there were those who held that on still nights they could be heard--sounding their trumpets---- "I want to link that up with the A. E. F. We were like the swans--a white company which flew to France---- Our idealism was the song which we sounded high up. And the world listened--and caught the sound---- And now, as a body we are extinct, but if men will listen, they may still hear our trumpets--sounding----!"
As he spoke the air seemed to throb with the passion of his phrases.
His face was uplifted to the sky. The Major remembered a picture in the corridor of the Library of Congress--the Boy of Winander---- Oh, the boys of the world--those wonderful boys who had been drawn out from among the rest, set apart for a time, and in whose hands now rested the fate of nations!
"It is epic," he said, slowly. "Take your time for it."
"It's too big," said Randy slowly, "and I am not a genius---- But it is my idea, all right, and some day, perhaps, I shall make it go."
"You must make it clear to yourself. Then you can make it clear to others."
"Yes," Randy agreed, "and now you can see why I am sitting up nights."
"Yes. How did you happen to think of it, Paine?"
"I've been turning a lot of things over in my mind----; what the other fellows are doing about their jobs. There's that boy at the butcher's, and a lot of us went over to do big things. And now we have come back to the little things. Why, there's Dalton's valet--Kemp--taking orders from that--cad."
His scorn seemed to cut into the night. "And I am selling cars---- I sold one to-day to an old darkey, and I felt my grandsires turn in their graves. But I like it."
The Major sat up. "Your liking it is the biggest thing about you, Paine."
"What do you mean?"
"A man who can do his day's work and not whine about it, is the man that counts. That butcher's boy may have a soul above weighing meat and wrapping sausages, but at the moment that's his job, and he is doing it well. There may be a divine discontent, but I respect the man who keeps his mouth shut until he finds a remedy or a raise.
"I don't often speak of myself," he went on, "but perhaps this is the moment. I am as thirsty for California, Paine, as a man for drink. It is the dry season out there, and the hills are brown, but I love the brown, and the purple shadows in the hollows. I have ridden over those hills for days at a time,--I shall never ride a horse over them again."
He stopped and went on. "Oh, I've wanted to whine. I have wanted to curse the fate that tied me to a chair like this. I have been an active man--out-of-doors, and oh, the out-of-doors in California.
There isn't anything like it--it is the sense of space, the clear-cut look of things. But I won't go back. Not till I have learned to do my day's work, and then I will let myself play a bit. I'd like to take you with me, Paine--you and a good car--and we'd go over the hills and far away---- "I haven't told you much of my life. And there's not a great deal to tell. Fifteen years ago I married a little girl and thought I loved her. But what I really loved was the thought of doing things for her.
I had money and she was poor. It was pleasant to see her eyes shine when I gave her things---- But money hasn't anything to do with love, Paine, and that is where we American men fall down. When we love a woman we begin to tell her of our possessions and to tempt her by them.
And the thing that we should do is to show her ourselves. We should say, 'If I were stripped of all my worldly goods what would there be in me for you to like?' My little wife and I had not one thing in common.
And one day she left me. She found a man who gave her love for love.
I had given her cars and flowers and boxes of candy and diamonds and furs. But she wanted more than that. She died--two years ago. I think she had been happy in those last years. I never really loved her, but she taught me what love is--and it is not a question of barter and sale----"
He seemed to be thinking aloud. Randy spoke after a silence. "But a man must have something to offer a woman."
"He must have himself. Oh, we are all crooked in our values, Paine.
The best that a man can give a woman is his courage, his hope, his aspiration. That's enough. I learned it too late. I don't know why I am saying all this to you, Paine."
But Randy knew. It was on such nights that men showed their souls to each other. It was on such nights that his comrades had talked to him in France. Under the moon they had seemed self-conscious. But beneath a sky of stars, the words had come to them.
As he sat at his desk later, he thought of all that the Major had said to him: that possessions had nothing to do with love; that the test must be, "What would there be in me to like if I were stripped of all my worldly goods?"
Well, he had nothing. There were only his hopes, his dreams, his aspirations--himself.
Would these weigh with any woman in the balance against George Dalton's splendid trappings?
The dawn crept in and found him still sitting at his desk. He had not written a dozen lines. But his thoughts had been the long, long thoughts of youth.
CHAPTER VI GEORGIE-PORGIE I It would never have happened if Aunt Claudia had been there. Aunt Claudia would have built hedges about Becky. She would have warned the Judge. She would, as a last resort, have challenged Dalton. But Fate, which had Becky's future well in hand, had sent Aunt Claudia to meet Truxton in New York. And she was having the time of her life.
Her first letter was a revelation to her niece. "I didn't know," she told the Judge at breakfast, "that Aunt Claudia could be like this----"
"Like what?"
"So young and gay----"
"She is not old. And when she was young she was gayer than you."
"Oh, not really, Grandfather."
"Yes. And she looked like you--and had the same tricks with her hands, and her hair was bright and brown. And she was very pretty."
"She is pretty yet," said Becky, loyally, but she was quite sure that whatever might have been Aunt Claudia's likeness to herself in the past, her own charms would not in the future shrink to fit Aunt Claudia's present pattern. It was unthinkable that her pink and white should fade to paleness, her slenderness to stiffness, her youthful radiance to a sort of weary cheerfulness.
There was nothing weary in the letter, however. "Oh, my dear, my dear, you should see Truxton. He is so perfectly splendid that I am sure he is a changeling and not my son. I tell him that he can't be the bundle of cuddly sweetness that I used to carry in my arms. I wore your white house-coat that first morning, Becky, and he sent some roses, and we had breakfast together in my rooms at the hotel. I believe it is the first time in years that I have looked into a mirror to really like my looks. You were sweet, my dear, to insist on putting it in. Truxton must stay here for two weeks more, and he wants me to stay with him.
Then we shall come down together. Can you get along without me? We are going to the most wonderful plays, and to smart places to eat, and I danced last night on a roof garden. Should I say 'on' or 'in' a roof garden? Truxton says that my step is as light as a girl's. I think my head is a little turned. I am very happy."
Becky laid the letter down. "Would anyone have believed that Aunt Claudia could----"
"You have said that before, my dear. Your Aunt Claudia wasn't born in the ark----"
"But, Grandfather, I didn't mean that."
"It sounded like it. I shall write to her to stay as long as she can.
We can get along perfectly without her."
"Of course," said Becky slowly. She had a feeling that, at all costs, she ought to call Aunt Claudia back.
For Dalton, after that first ride in the rain from Pavilion Hill, had speeded his wooing. He had swept Becky along on a rushing tide. He had courted the Judge, and the Judge had pressed upon him invitation after invitation. Day and night the big motor had flashed up to Huntersfield, bringing Dalton to some tryst with Becky, or carrying her forth to some gay adventure. Her world was rose-colored. She had not dreamed of life like this. She seemed to have drunk of some new wine, which lighted her eyes and flamed in her cheeks. Her beauty shone with an almost transcendent quality. As the dove's plumage takes on in the spring an added luster, so did the bronze of Becky's hair seem to burn with a brighter sheen.
Yet the Judge noticed nothing.
"Did you ask him to dine with us?" he had demanded, when Dalton had called Becky up on the morning of the receipt of Aunt Claudia's letter.
"No, Grandfather."
"Then I'll do it," and he had gone to the telephone, and had urged his hospitality.
II When Dalton came Becky met him on the front steps of the house.
"Dinner is late," she said, "let's go down into the garden."
The garden at Huntersfield was square with box hedges and peaked up with yew, and there were stained marble statues of Diana and Flora and Ceres, and a little pool with lily pads.
"You are like the pretty little girls in the picture books," said George, as they walked along. "Isn't that a new frock?"
"Yes," said Becky, "it is. Do you like it?"
"You are a rose among the roses," he said. He wondered a bit at its apparent expensiveness. Perhaps, however, Becky was skillful with her needle. Some women were. He did not care greatly for such skill, but he was charmed by the effect.
"You are a rose among the roses," he said again, and broke off a big pink bud from a bush near by. "Bend your head a little. I want to put it in your hair."
His fingers caught in the bronze mesh. "It is wound around my ring."
He fumbled in his pockets with his free hand and got his knife. "It may pull a bit."
He showed her presently the lock which he had cut. "It seems alive,"
he kissed it and put it in his pocket.
Her protest was genuine. "Oh, please," she said, "I wish you wouldn't."
"Wouldn't what?"
"Keep it."
"Shall I throw it away?"
"You shouldn't have cut it off."
"Other men have been tempted--in a garden----"
It might have startled George could he have known that old Mandy, eyeing him from the kitchen, placed him in Eden's bower not as the hero of the world's initial tragedy, but as its Satanic villain.
"He sutt'n'y have _be_witched Miss Becky," she told Calvin; "she ain'
got her min' on nothin' but him."
"Yo' put yo' min' on yo' roas' lamb, honey," Calvin suggested.
"How-cum you got late?"
"That chile kep' me fixin' that pink dress. She ain' never cyard what she wo'. And now she stan' in front o' dat lookin'-glass an' fuss an'
fiddle. And w'en she ain' fussin' an' fiddlin', she jus' moons around, waitin' fo' him to come ridin' up in that red car like a devil on greased light'in'. An' I say right heah, Miss Claudia ain' gwine like it."
"Why ain' she?"
"Miss Claudia know black f'um w'ite. An' dat man done got a black heart----"
"Whut yon know 'bout hit, Mandy?"
"Lissen. You wait. He'll suck a o'ange an' th'ow it away. He'll pull a rose, and scattah the leaves." Mandy, stirring gravy, was none the less dramatic. "You lissen, an' wait----"
"Wen Miss Claudia comin'?"
"In one week, thank the Lord," Mandy pushed the gravy to the back of the stove and pulled forward an iron pot. "The soup's ready," she said; "you go up and tell the Jedge, Calvin."
All through dinner, Becky was conscious of that lock of hair in George's pocket. The strand from which the lock had been cut fell down on her cheek. She had to tuck it back. She saw George smile as she did it. She forgave him.
It was after dinner that George spoke of Becky's gown.
"It is perfect," he said, "all except the pearls----?"
She gave him a startled glance. "The pearls?"
"I want to see you without them."
She unwound them and they dripped from her hand in milky whiteness.
He made his survey. "That's better," he said, "if they were real it would be different--I don't like to have you cheapened by anything less than--perfect----"
"Cheapened?" She smiled inscrutably, then dropped the pearls into a small box on the table beside her. "Yes," she said, "if they were real it would be different----"
There was something in her manner which made him say hurriedly, "You must not think that I am criticizing your taste. If I had my way you should have everything that money can buy----"
Her candid eyes came up to his. "There are a great many things that money cannot buy."
"You've got to show me," George told her; "I've never seen anything yet that I couldn't get with money."
"Could you buy--dreams----"
"I'd rather buy--diamonds."
"And money can't buy happiness."
"It can buy a pretty good imitation."
"But imitation happiness is like imitation pearls."
He laughed and sat down beside her. "You mustn't be too clever."
"I am not clever at all."
"I believe you are. And you don't have to be. There are plenty of clever women but only one Becky Bannister."
It was just an hour later that Georgie-Porgie kissed her. She was at the piano in the music-room, and there was no light except the glimmer of tall white candles, and the silver moonlight which fell across the shining floor.
Her grandfather was nodding in the room beyond, and through the open window came the dry, sweet scent of summer, as if nature had opened her pot-pourri to give the world a whiff of treasured fragrance.
Becky had been singing, and she had stopped and looked up at him.
"Oh, you lovely--lovely, little thing," he said, and bent his head.
To Becky, that moment was supreme, sacred. She trembled with happiness. To her that kiss meant betrothal--ultimate marriage.
To George it meant, of course, nothing of the kind. It was only one of many moments. It was a romance which might have been borrowed from the Middle Ages. A rare tale such as one might read in a book. A pleasant dalliance--to be continued until he was tired of it. If he ever married, it must be a spectacular affair--handsome woman, big fortune, not an unsophisticated slip of a child from an impoverished Virginia farm.
III In the days that followed, Becky's gay lover came and rode away, and came again. He sparkled and shone and worshipped, but not a word did he say about the future. He seemed content with this idyl of old gardens, scented twilights, starlight nights, with Beauty's eyes for him alone radiant eyes that matched the stars.
Yet as the days went on the radiance was dimmed. Becky was in a state of bewilderment which bordered on fear. George showed himself an incomparable lover, but always he was silent about the things which she felt cried for utterance.
So at last one day she spoke to the Judge.
"Granddad, did you kiss Grandmother before you asked her to marry you?"
"Asking always comes first, my dear. And you are too young to think of such things."
Grandfather was, thus obviously, no help. He sat in the Bird Room and dreamed of the days when the stuffed mocking-bird on the wax branch sang to a young bride, and his ideal of love had to do with the courtly etiquette of a time when men knelt and sued and were rewarded with the touch of finger tips.
As for George, he found himself liking this affair rather more than usual. There was no denying that the child was tremendously attractive--with her youth and beauty and the reserve which like a stone wall seemed now and then to shut her in. He had always a feeling that he would like to climb over the wall. It had pricked his interest to find in this little creature a strength and delicacy which he had found in no other woman.
He had had one or two letters from Madge, and had answered them with a line. She gave rather generously of her correspondence and her letters were never dull. In the last one she had asked him to join her on the North Shore.
"I am sorry," she said, "for the new little girl. I have a feeling that she won't know how to play the game and that you'll hurt her. You will probably think that I am jealous, but I can't help that. Men always think that women are jealous when it comes to other women. They never seem to understand that we are trying to keep the world straight.
"Oscar writes that Flora isn't well, that all her other guests are gone except you--and that she wants me. But why should I come? I wish he wouldn't ask me. Something always tugs at my heart when I think of Flora. She has so much and yet so little. She and Oscar would be much happier in a flat on the West Side with Flora cooking in a kitchenette, and Oscar bringing things home from the delicatessen. He would buy bologna and potato salad on Sunday nights, and perhaps they would slice up a raw onion. It sounds dreadful, doesn't it? But there are thousands of people doing just that thing, Georgie, and being very happy over it. And it wouldn't be dreadful for Flora and Oscar because they would be right where they belong, and the potato salad and the bologna and the little room where Oscar could sit with his coat off would be much more to their liking than their present pomp and elegance. You and I are different. You could never play any part pleasantly but that of Prince Charming, and I should hate the kitchenette. I want wide spaces, and old houses, and deep fireplaces--my people far back were like that--I sometimes wonder why I stick to Flora--perhaps it is because she clung to me in those days when Oscar was drafted and had to go, and she cried so hard in the Red Cross rooms that I took her under my wing---- Take it all together, Flora is rather worth while and so is Oscar if he didn't try so hard to be what he is not.
"But then we are all trying rather hard to be what we are not. I am really and truly middle-class. In my mind, I mean. Yet no one would believe it to look at me, for I wear my clothes like a Frenchwoman, and I am as unconventional as English royalty. And two generations of us have inherited money. But back of that there were nice middle-class New Englanders who did their own work. And the women wore white aprons, and the men wore overalls, and they ate doughnuts for breakfast, and baked beans on Sunday, and they milked their own cows, and skimmed their own cream, and they read Hamlet and the King James version of the Bible, and a lot of them wrote things that will be remembered throughout the ages, and they had big families and went to church, and came home to overflowing hospitality and chicken pies--and they were the salt of the earth. And as I think I remarked to you once before, I want to be like my great-grandmother in my next incarnation, and live in a wide, low farmhouse, and have horses and hogs and chickens and pop-corn on snowy nights, and go to church on Sunday.
"I don't know why I am writing like this, except that I went to Trinity to vespers, when I stopped over in Boston. It was dim and quiet and the boys' voices were heavenly, and over it all brooded the spirit of the great man who once preached there--and who still preaches---- "And now it is Sunday again, and I am back at the Crossing, and I played golf all the morning, and bridge this afternoon, and all the women smoked and all the men, and I was in a blue haze, and I wanted to be back in the quiet church where the boys sang, and the lights were like stars---- "I wish you and I could go there some day and that you could feel as I do about it. But you wouldn't. You are always so sure and smug--and you have a feeling that money will buy anything--even Paradise. I wonder what you will be like on the next plane. You won't fit into my farmhouse. I fancy that you'll be something rather--devilish--like Don Juan--or perhaps you'll be just an 'ostler in a courtyard, shining boots and--kissing maids---- "Of course I don't quite mean that. But I do feel that you'd be rather worth while if you'd stop philandering and discover your soul.
"I am a bit homesick, and I haven't any home. If Dad hadn't married a second time, I believe he would still love me a bit. But his wife doesn't. And so here I am--and as restless as ever--seeking something--always seeking.
"And now, once more, don't break the heart of the new little girl. I don't need to warn you not to break your own. You are the greatest example of the truth of 'he who loves and runs away will live to love another day.' Oh, Georgie-Porgie, will you ever love any woman enough to rise with her to the heights?
"Perhaps there aren't any heights for you or me. But I should like to think there were. Different hilltops, of course, so that we could wave across. We shall never climb together, Georgie. Perhaps we are too much alike to help each other up the hills. We need stronger props.
"Tell me about Flora. Is she really ill? If she is, I'll come. But I'd rather not.
"I hope you won't read this aloud to Oscar. You might, you know, and it wouldn't do. He would hate to believe that he'd be happier buying things at a delicatessen, and he wouldn't believe it. But it's true, just as it is true that you would be happy shining boots and making love to the maids like a character in Dickens.
"Come on up, and we'll motor to Boston on Sunday afternoon and we'll go to Trinity; I want somebody to be good with me, Georgie, and there are so many of the other kind.
"Ever wistfully, "MADGE."
George knew that he ought to go, but he was not ready yet to run away.
He was having the time of his life, and as for Becky, he would teach her how to play the game.
IV Aunt Claudia was away for three weeks.
"I wish she would come home," young Paine said one morning to his mother.
"Why?" Caroline Paine was at her desk with her mind on the dinner.
"Why, Randy?"
"Oh, Dalton's going there a lot."
Mrs. Paine headed her list with gumbo soup. "Do you think he goes to see Becky?"
"Does a duck swim? Of course he goes there to see her, and he's turning her head."
"He is enough to turn any woman's head. He has nice eyes." Mrs. Paine left the topic as negligible, and turned to more important things.
"Randy, would you mind picking a few pods of okra for the soup? Susie is so busy and Bob and Jefferson are both in the field."
"Certainly, Mother," his cool answer gave no hint of the emotions which were seething within him. Becky's fate was hanging in the balance, and his mother talked of okra! He had decided some weeks ago that boarders were disintegrating--and that a mother was not a mother who had three big meals a day on her mind.
He went into the garden. An old-fashioned garden, so common at one time in the South--with a picket fence, a little gate, orderly paths--a blaze of flowers to the right, and to the left a riot of vegetables--fat tomatoes weighing the vines to the ground, cucumbers hiding under their sheltering leaves, cabbages burgeoning in blue-green, and giving the promise of unlimited boiled dinners, onions enough to flavor a thousand delectable dishes, sweet corn running in countless rows up the hill, carrots waving their plumes, Falstaffian watermelons. It was evident with the garden as an index that the boarders at King's Crest were fed on more than milk and honey.
Randy picked the okra and carried it to the kitchen, and returning to the Schoolhouse found the Major opening his morning mail.
Randy sat down on the step. "Once upon a time," he said, "we had niggers to work in our gardens. And now we are all niggers."
The Major's keen eyes studied him. "What's the matter?"
"I've been picking okra--for soup, and I'm a Paine of King's Crest."
"Well, you peeled potatoes in France."
"That's different."
"Why should it be different? If a thing is for the moment your job you are never too big for it."
"I wish I had stayed in the Army. I wish I had never come back."
The Major whistled for a moment, thoughtfully. Then he said, "Look here, Paine, hadn't you better talk about it?"
"Talk about what?"
"That's for you to tell me. There's something worrying you. You are more tragic than--Hamlet----"
"Well--it's--Becky----"
"And Dalton, of course. Why don't you cut him out, Paine----"
"Me? Oh, look here, Major, what have I to offer her?"
"Youth and energy and a fighting spirit," the Major rapped out the words.
"What is a fighting spirit worth," Randy asked with a sort of weary scorn, "when a man is poor, and the woman's rich?"
The Major had been whistling a silly little tune from a modern opera.
It was an air which his men would have recognized. It came to an end abruptly. "Rich? Who is rich?"
"Becky."
The Major got up and limped to the porch rail.
"I thought she was as poor as----"
"The rest of us? Well, she isn't."
It appeared that Becky's fortune came from the Nantucket grandmother, and that there would be more when the Admiral died. It was really a very large fortune, well invested, and yielding an amazing income. One of the clauses of the grandmother's will had to do with the bringing up of Becky. Until she was of age she was to be kept as much as possible away from the distractions and temptations of modern luxury. The Judge and the Admiral had agreed that nothing could be better. The result, Randy said, was that nobody ever thought of Becky Bannister as rich.
"Yet those pearls that she wears are worth more than I ever expect to earn."
"It is rather like a fairy tale. The beggar-maid becomes a queen."
"You can gee now why I can't offer her just youth and a fighting spirit."
"I wonder if Dalton knows."
"I don't believe he does," Randy; said slowly, "I give him credit for that."
"He might have heard----"
"I doubt it. He hasn't mingled much, you know."
"It will be rather a joke on him----"
"To find that he has married--Mademoiselle Midas?"
"To find that she is Mademoiselle Midas, whether he marries her or not."
V Of course Georgie-Porgie ran away. It was the inevitable climax.
Flora's illness hastened things a bit.
"She wants to see her New York doctors," Waterman had said. "I think we shall close the house, and join Madge later at the Crossing."
George felt an unexpected sense of shock. The game must end, yet he wanted it to go on. The cards were in his hands, and he was not quite ready to turn the trick.
"When do we go?" he asked Oscar.
"In a couple of days if we can manage it. Flora is getting worried about herself. She thinks it is her heart."
George rode all of that afternoon with Becky. But not a word did he say about his departure. He never spoiled a thing like this with "Good-bye." Back at Waterman's, Kemp was packing trunks. In forty-eight hours there would be the folding of tents, and Hamilton Hill would be deserted. It added a pensiveness to his manner that made him more than ever charming. It rained on the way home, and it seemed to him significant that his first ride and his last with Becky should have been in the rain.
He stayed to dinner, and afterwards he and Becky walked together in the fragrance of the wet garden. A new moon hung low for a while and was then lost behind the hills.
"My little girl," George said when the moment came that he must go, "My dear little girl." He gathered her up in his arms--but did not kiss her. For once in his life, Georgie-Porgie was too deeply moved for kisses.
After he had gone, Becky went into the Bird Room, and stood on the hearth and looked up at the Trumpeter Swan. There was no one to whom she could speak of the ecstasy which surged through her. As a child she had brought her joys here, and her sorrows--her Christmas presents in the early morning--the first flowers of the spring. She had sat here often in her little black frock and had felt the silent sympathy of the wise old bird.
He gazed down at her now with an almost uncanny intelligence. She laughed a little and standing on tiptoe laid her cheek against the cool glass. "When I am married," was her wordless question, "will you sound your trumpet high up near the moon?"
CHAPTER VII MADEMOISELLE MIDAS I There came to Huntersfield the next morning at about the same moment, Kemp in his little car with a small parcel for Becky, and Calvin with a big box from the express office.
Becky was in her room at breakfast when Calvin brought the boxes up to her. It was a sunshiny morning, and the Judge had gone a-fishing with Mr. Flippin. Becky, in a lace cap and a robe that was delicately blue, sat in a big chair with a low table in front of her.
There were white roses on the table in a silver bowl. The Judge had sent them to her. The Judge had for the women of his family a feeling that was almost youthfully romantic, and which was, unquestionably, old-fashioned. He liked to think that they had roses for their little noses, ribbons and laces for their pretty faces. He wanted no harsh winds to blow on them. And in return for the softness and ease with which he would surround them, he wanted their deference to his masculine point of view.
With the box which George sent was a note. It was the first that Becky had ever received from her lover. George's code did not include much correspondence. Flaming sentiment on paper was apt to look silly when the affair ended.
To Becky, her name on the outside of the envelope seemed written in gold. She was all blushing expectation.
"There ain't no answer," Calvin said, and she waited for him to go before she opened it.
She read it and sat there drained of all feeling. She was as white as the roses on her table. She read the note again and her hands shook.
"Flora is very ill. We are taking her up to New York. After that we shall go to the North Shore. There isn't time for me to come and say;
'Good-bye.' Perhaps it is better not to come. It has been a wonderful summer, and it is you who have made it wonderful for me. The memory will linger with me always--like a sweet dream or a rare old tale. I am sending yon a little token--for remembrance. Think of me sometimes, Becky."
That was all, except a scrawled "G. D." at the end. No word of coming back. No word of writing to her again. No word of any future in which she would have a part.
She opened the box. Within on a slender chain was a pendant--a square sapphire set in platinum, and surrounded by diamonds. George had ordered it in anticipation of this crisis. He had, hitherto, found such things rather effective in the cure of broken hearts.
Now, had George but known it, Becky had jewels in leather cases in the vaults of her bank which put his sapphire trinket to shame. There were the diamonds in which a Meredith great-grandmother had been presented at the Court of St. James, and there were the pearls of which her own string was a small part. There were emeralds and rubies, old corals and jade--not for nothing had the Admiral sailed the seas, bringing back from China and India lovely things for the woman he loved. And now the jewels were Becky's, and she had not cared for them in the least. If George had loved her she would have cherished his sapphire more than all the rest.
But he did not love her. She knew it in that moment. All of her doubts were confirmed.
The thing that had happened to her seemed incredible.
She put the sapphire back in its box, wrapped it, tied the string carefully and called Mandy.
"Tell Calvin to take this to Mr. Dalton."
Mandy knew at once that something was wrong. But this was not a moment for words. The Bannisters did not talk about things that troubled them. They held their heads high. And Becky's was high at this moment, and her eyes were blazing.
As she sat there, tense, Becky wondered what Dalton could have thought of her. If she had not had a jewel in the world, she would not have kept his sapphire. Didn't he know that?
But how could he know? To him it had been "a sweet dream--a rare old tale," and she had thought him a Romeo ready to die for her sake, an Aucassin--willing to brave Hell rather than give her up, a Lohengrin sent from Heaven!
She shuddered and hid her face in her hands. At last she crept into bed. Mandy, coming in to straighten the room, was told to lower the curtains.
"My--my head aches, Mandy."
Mandy, wise old Mandy, knew of course that it was her heart. "You res'
an' sleep, honey," she said, and moved about quietly setting things in order.
But Becky did not sleep. She lay wide awake, and tried to get the thing straight in her mind. How had it happened? Where had she failed? Oh, why hadn't Sister Loretto told her that there were men like this? Why hadn't Aunt Claudia returned in time?
In the big box which Mandy had brought up were clothes--exquisite things which Becky had ordered from New York. She had thought it a miracle that George should have fallen in love with her believing her poor. It showed, she felt, his splendidness, his kindly indifference to--poverty. Yet she had planned a moment when he should know. When their love was proclaimed to the world he should see her in a splendor which matched his own. He had loved her in spite of her faded cottons, in spite of her shabby shoes. She had made up her list carefully, thinking of his sparkling eyes when he behold her.
She got out of bed and opened the box. The lively garments were wrapped in rosy tissue paper, and tied with ribbons to match. It seemed to Becky as if those rosy wrappings held the last faint glow of her dreams.
She untied the ribbons of the top parcel, and disclosed a frock of fine white lace--there was cloth of silver for a petticoat, and silver slippers. She would have worn her pearls, and George and she would have danced together at the Harvest Ball at the Merriweathers. It was an annual and very exclusive affair in the county. It was not likely that the Watermans and their guests would be invited, but there would have been a welcome for Dalton as her friend--her more than friend.
There was a white lace wrap with puffs of pink taffeta and knots of silver ribbon which went with the gown. Becky with a sudden impulse put it on. She stripped the cap from her head, and wound her bronze locks in a high knot. She surveyed herself.
Well, she was Becky Bannister of Huntersfield--and the mirror showed her beauty. And Dalton had not known or cared. He thought her poor;
and had thrown her aside like an old glove!
Down-stairs the telephone rang. Old Mandy, coming up to say that Mr.
Randy was on the wire, stood in amazement at the sight of Becky in the rosy wrap with her hair peaked up to a topknot.
"Ain' you in baid?" she asked, superfluously.
"No. Who wants me, Mandy?"
"I tole you--Mr. Randy."
Becky deliberated. "I'll go down. When I come up we'll unpack all this, Mandy."
Randy at the other end of the wire was asking Becky to go to a barbecue the next day.
"The boarders are giving it--it is Mother's birthday and they want to celebrate. It is to be on Pavilion Hill. They want you and the Judge----"
"To-morrow? Oh, I don't know, Randy."
"Why not? Have you another engagement?"
"No."
"Then what's the matter? Can't you tear yourself away from your shining knight?"
Silence.
"Becky--oh, I didn't mean that. I'm sorry--_Becky_----"
Her answer came faintly, "I'll come."
"What's the matter with the wire? I can't hear you."
There was nothing the matter with the wire. The thing that was the matter was Becky's voice. She found it suddenly unmanageable. "We'll come," she told him finally, and hung up the receiver.
She ascended the stairs as if she carried a burden on her back. Mandy was on her knees before the hamper, untying the rosy packages.
"Is you goin' to try 'em on, honey?" she asked.
Becky stood in the doorway, the lace wrap hanging from her shoulders and showing the delicate blue of the negligee beneath--her face was like chalk but her eyes shone. "Yes," she said, "there's a pink gingham I want to wear to the barbecue to-morrow. There ought to be a hat to match. Did the hats come, Mandy?"
"Calvin he say there's another box, but he ain' brought it up from the deepot. He was ridin' dat Jo-mule, and this yer basket was all he could ca'y."
In the pink frock Becky looked like a lovely child.
"Huc-cum you-all gettin' eve'y thing pink, Miss Becky?" Mandy asked.
"For a change," said Becky.
And how could she tell old Mandy that she had felt that in a rose-colored world everything should be rose-color?
She tried on each frock deliberately. She tried on every pair of slippers. She tried on the wraps, and the hats which came up finally with Calvin staggering beneath the bulkiness of the box. She was lovely in everything. And she was no longer the little Becky Bannister whom Dalton had wooed. She was Mademoiselle Midas, appraising her beauty in her lovely clothes, and wondering what Dalton would think if he could see her.
II Becky did not, after all, wear the pink gingham. The Judge elected to go on horseback, so Becky rode forth by his side correctly and smartly attired in a gray habit, with a straight black sailor and a high stock and boots that made her look like a charming boy.
They came to Pavilion Hill to find the boarders like the chorus in light opera very picturesque in summer dresses and summer flannels, and with Mrs. Paine in a broad hat playing the part of leading lady. Mr.
Flippin, who was high-priest at all of the county barbecues, was superintending the roasting of a whole pig, and Mrs. Flippin had her mind on hot biscuits. The young mulatto, Daisy, and Mandy's John, with the negroes from the Paine household, were setting the long tables under the trees. There was the good smell of coffee, much laughter, and a generally festive atmosphere.
The Judge, enthroned presently in the Pavilion, was the pivotal center of the crowd. Everybody wanted to hear his stories, and with this fresh audience to stimulate him, he dominated the scene. He wore a sack suit and a Panama hat and his thin, fine face, the puff of curled white hair at the back of his neck, the gayety of his glance gave an almost theatric touch to his appearance, so that one felt he might at any moment come down stage and sing a topical song in the best Gilbertian manner.
It was an old scene with a new setting. It was not the first time that Pavilion Hill had been the backgrounds of a barbecue. But it was the first time that a Paine of King's Crest had accepted hospitality on its own land. It was the first time that it had echoed to the voices of an alien group. It was the first time that it had seen a fighting black man home from France. The old order had changed indeed. No more would there be feudal lords of Albemarle acres.
Yet old loyalties die hard. It was the Judge and Mrs. Paine and Becky and Randy who stood first in the hearts of the dusky folk who served at the long tables. The boarders were not in any sense "quality."
Whatever they might be, North, East and West, their names were not known on Virginia records. And what was any family tree worth if it was not rooted in Virginia soil?
"Effen the Jedge was a king and wo' a crown," said Mandy's John to Daisy, "he couldn't look mo' bawn to a th'one."
Daisy nodded. "Settin' at the head o' that table minds me o' whut my old Mammy used to say, 'han'some is as han'some does.' The Bannisters _done_ han'some and they _is_ handsome."
"They sure is," John agreed; "that-all's whut makes you so good-lookin', Daisy."
He came close to her and she drew away. "You put yo' min' on passin'
them plates," she said with severity, "or you'll be spillin' po'k gravy on they haids." Her smile took away the sting of her admonition. John moved on, murmuring, "Well, yo' does han'some and yo' is han'some, Daisy, and that's why I loves you."
There were speeches after dinner. One from Randy, in which he thanked them in the name of his mother, and found himself quite suddenly and unexpectedly being fond of the boarders. Major Prime was not there.
He had been summoned back to Washington, but would return, he hoped, for the week-end.
It was after lunch that Randy and Becky walked to the woods. Nellie Custis followed them. They sat down at last at the foot of a hickory tree. Becky took off her hat and the wind blew her shining hair about her face. She was pale and wore an air of deep preoccupation.
"Randy," she asked suddenly out of a long silence, "did you ever kiss a girl?"
Her question did not surprise him. He and Becky had argued many matters. And they usually plunged in without preliminaries. He fancied that Becky was discussing kisses in the abstract. It never occurred to him that the problem was personal.
"Yes," he said, "I have. What about it?"
"Did you--ask her to marry you?"
"No."
"Why not?"
He pulled Nellie Custis' ears. "One of them wasn't a nice sort of girl--not the kind that I should have cared to introduce to--you."
"Yet you cared to--kiss her?"
Randy flushed faintly. "I know how it looks to you. I hated it afterwards, but I couldn't marry a girl--like that----"
"Who was the other girl?"
For a moment he did not reply, then he said with something of an effort, "It was you, Becky."
"Me? When?" She turned on him her startled gaze.
"Do you remember at Christmas--oh, ten years ago--and your grandfather had a party for you. There was mistletoe in the hall, and we danced and stopped under the mistletoe----"
"I remember, Randy--how long ago it seems."
"Yet ten years isn't really such a long time, is it, Becky? I was only a little boy, but I told myself then that I would never kiss any other girl. I thought then that--that some day I might ask you to marry me.
I--I had a wild dream that I might try to make you love me. I didn't know then that poverty is a millstone about a man's neck." He gave a bitter laugh.
Becky's breath came quickly. "Oh, Randy," she said, "poverty wouldn't have had anything to do with it--not if we had--cared----"
"I care," said Randy, "and I think the first time I knew how much I cared was when I kissed that other girl. Somehow you came to me that night, a little white thing, so fine and different, and I loathed her."
He was standing now--tall and lean and black-haired, but with the look of race on his thin face, a rather princely chap in spite of his shabby clothes. "Of course you don't care," he said; "I think if I had money I should try to make you. But I haven't the right. I had thought that, perhaps, if no other man came that some time I might----"
Becky picked up her riding crop, and as she talked she tapped her hoot in a sort of staccato accompaniment.
"That other man has come," _tap-tap_, "he kissed me," _tap-tap_, "and made me love him," _tap-tap_, "and he has gone away--and he hasn't asked me to marry him."
One saw the Indian in Randy now, in the lifted head, the square-set jaw, the almost cruel keenness of the eyes.
"Of course it is George Dalton," he said.
"Yes."
"I could kill him, Becky."
She laughed, ruefully. "For what? Perhaps he thinks I'm not a nice sort of girl--like the one you kissed----"
"For God's sake, Becky."
He sat down on a flat rock. He was white, and shaking a little. He wanted more than anything else in the wide world to kill George Dalton.
Of course in these days such things were preposterous. But he had murder in his heart.
"I blame myself," Becky said, _tap-tap_, "I should have known that a man doesn't respect," _tap-tap_, "a woman he can kiss."
He took the riding crop forcibly out of her hands. "Look at me, look at me, Becky, do you love him?"
She whispered, "Yes."
"Then he's got to marry you."
But her pride was up. "Do you think I want him if he doesn't want--me?"
"He shall want you," said Randy Paine; "the day shall come when he shall beg on his knees."
Randy had studied law. But there are laws back of the laws of the white man. The Indian knows no rest until his enemy is in his hands.
Randy lay awake late that night thinking it out. But he was not thinking only of Georgie. He was thinking of Becky and her self-respect. "She will never get it back," he said, "until that dog asks her to marry him."
He had faith enough in her to believe that she would not marry Dalton now if he asked her. But she must be given the chance.
CHAPTER VIII ANCESTORS I The Judge and Mr. Flippin were fishing, with grasshoppers for bait.
The fish that they caught they called "shiners." As an edible product "shiners" were of little account. But the Judge and Mr. Flippin did not fish for food, they fished for sport. It was mild sport compared to the fishing of other days when the Judge had waded into mountain streams with the water coming up close to the pocket of his flannel shirt where he kept his cigars, or had been poled by Bob Flippin from "riffle" to pool. Those had been the days of speckled trout and small-mouthed bass, and Bob had been a boy and the Judge at middle age.
Now Bob Flippin had reached the middle years, and the Judge was old, but they still fished together. They were comrades in a very close and special sense. What Bob Flippin lacked in education and culture he made up in wisdom and adoration of the Judge. When he talked he had something to say, but as a rule he let the Judge talk and was always an absorbed listener.
There was in their relations, however, a complete adjustment to the class distinctions which separated them. The Judge accepted as his right the personal service with which Bob Flippin delighted to honor him. It was always Bob who pulled the boat and carried the basket. It was Bob who caught the grasshoppers and cooked the lunch.
There was one dish dedicated to a day's fishing--fried ham and eggs.
Bob had a long-handled frying-pan, and the food was seasoned with the salt and savor of the out-of-doors.
There were always several dogs to bear their masters company. The Judge's three were beagles--tireless hunters of rabbits, and somewhat in disgrace as a species since Germany had gone to war with the world.
Individually, however, they were beloved by the Judge because they were the children and grandchildren of a certain old Dinah who had slept in a basket by his bed until she died.
Bob Flippin had a couple of setters, and the five canines formed a wistful semicircle around the lunch basket.
The lunch basket was really a fishing-basket, lined with tin. In one end was a receptacle for ice. After the lunch was eaten, the fish were put next to the ice, and the basket thus served two purposes.
Among the other edibles there were always corncakes for the dogs. They knew it, and had the patience of assured expectation.
"Truxton comes on Saturday," said the Judge as he watched Bob turn the eggs expertly in the long-handled pan, "and Claudia. I told Becky to ride over this morning and ask your wife if she could help Mandy.
Mandy's all right when there's nobody but the family, but when there's company in prospect she moans and groans."
"Mollie's up at the Watermans'; Mrs. Waterman is worse. They expected to take her to New York, but she is too ill, and they are going to have the doctors bring another nurse."
"I had a note from Mr. Dalton," said the Judge, "saying they were going. It was rather sudden, and he was sorry. Nice fellow. He liked to come over and look at my birds."
Bob Flippin's eyes twinkled. "I reckon he liked to look at a pretty girl----"
The Judge stared at him. "At Becky?"
Flippin nodded. "Didn't you know it?"
"Bless my soul." The Judge was unquestionably startled. "But I don't know anything about him. I can't have him running after Becky."
"Seems to me he's been a-runnin'."
"But what would Claudia say? I don't know anything about his family.
Maybe he hasn't any family. How do I know he isn't a fortune-hunter?"
"Well, he isn't a bird hunter, I can tell you that. I saw him kick one of your dogs. A man that will kick a dog isn't fit to hold a gun."
"No, he isn't," said the Judge, soberly. "I'm upset by what you've said, Flippin. Dalton's all right as far as I can see as a friend of mine. But when anybody comes courting at Huntersfield he's got to show credentials."
He ate his lunch without much appetite. He was guiltily aware of what Claudia would say if she knew what had happened.
But perhaps nothing had happened and perhaps she need not know. He cheered up and threw a bit of ham to the waiting dogs. Perhaps Becky wasn't interested. Perhaps, after all, Dalton had been genuine in his interest in the stuffed birds.
"Becky's too young for things like that," he began hopefully.
But Bob Flippin shook his head. "Girls are queer, Judge, and you never can tell what they're goin' to do next. Now, there's my Mary--running off and getting married, and coming home and not talking much about it.
She--didn't even bring her marriage certificate. Said that he had kept it. But she's never lied to me, and I know when she says she's married, she's--married--but it's queer. He ain't written now for weeks, but she ain't worried. She says she knows the reason, but she can't tell me. And when I try to ask questions, she just looks me straight in the eye and says, 'I never lied to you, Father, did I? And it's all right.'"
"He has a good name," said the Judge. "Branch--it's one of our names--my wife's family."
"But I reckon there ain't never been any Truelove Branches in your family tree. I laugh at Mary when she calls him that. '"Truelove"
ain't any name for a man, Mary,' I tell her. But she says there couldn't be a better one. And she insisted on naming the child 'Fidelity.' But if anybody had told me that my little Mary--would take things into her own hands like that--why, Judge, before she went away to teach school, she leaned on me and her mother--and now she's as stiff as a poker when we try to ask about her affairs----"
"Does he support her?" the Judge asked.
"Sends her plenty of money. She always seems to have enough, even when he doesn't write. He'll be coming one of these days--and then we'll get the thing straight, but in the meantime there ain't any use in asking Mary."
He brought out the bag of corn-cakes and fed the dogs. They were a well-bred crew and took their share in turn, sitting in a row and going through the ceremony with an air of enjoying not only the food but the attention they attracted front the two men.
"Of course," said Mr. Flippin as he gathered, up the lunch things, "I'm saying to you what I wouldn't say to another soul. Mary's my girl, and she's all right. But I naturally have the feelings of a father."
The Judge stretched himself on the grass, and pulled his hat over his eyes. "Girls are queer, and if that Dalton thinks he can court my Becky----" He stopped, and spoke again from under his hat, "Oh, what's the use of worrying, Bob, on a day like this?"
The Judge always napped after lunch, and Bob Flippin, stretched beside him, lay awake and watched the stream slip by in a sheet of silver, he watched a squirrel flattened on the limb above him, he watched the birds that fluttered down to the pools to bathe, he watched the buzzards sailing high above the hills.
And presently he found himself watching his own daughter Mary, as she came along the opposite bank of the stream.
She was drawing Fiddle-dee-dee in a small red cart and was walking slowly.
She walked well. Country-born and country-bred, there was nothing about her of plodding peasant. All her life she had danced with the Bannisters and the Beauforts. Yet she had never been invited to the big balls. When the Merriweathers gave their Harvest Dance, Mary and her mother would go over and help bake the cakes, and at night they would sit in the gallery of the great ballroom and watch the dancers, but Mary would not be asked out on the floor.
Seeing the Judge asleep, Mary stopped and beckoned from the other side.
Flippin rose and made his way across the stream, stepping from stone to stone.
"Mother wants you to come right up to the Watermans', Father. Mrs.
Waterman is to have an operation, and you are to direct the servants in fitting up a room for the surgeons. The nurse will tell you what to do."
Mr. Flippin rubbed his face with his handkerchief. "I don't like to wake the Judge."
"I'll stay here and tell him," Mary said. "And you can send Calvin down to carry the basket."
She was standing beside him, and suddenly she laid her cheek against his arm. "I love you," she said, "you are a darling, Daddy."
He patted her cheek. "That sounds like my little Mary."
"Don't I always sound like your little Mary?"
"Not always."
"Well--I've had things on my mind." Her blue eyes met his, and she flushed a bit. "Not things that I am sorry for, but things that I am worried about. But now--well, I am very happy in my heart, Daddy."
He smiled down at her. "Have you heard from T. Branch?"
"Yes, by wireless----"
He looked his astonishment. "Wireless?"
"Heart-wireless, Daddy. Didn't you get messages that way when you were young--from Mother?"
"How do I know? It's been twenty-five years since then, and we haven't had to send messages. We've just held on to each other's hands, thank God." He bent and kissed her. "You stay and tell the Judge, Mary.
He'll sleep for a half-hour yet: he's as regular as the clock."
His own two dogs followed him, but the Judge's beagles lay with their noses on their paws at their master's feet. Now and then they snapped at flies but otherwise they were motionless.
Before the half hour was up Fiddle-dee-dee fell asleep, and the Judge waking, saw on the other side of a stream propped against the gray old oak, the young mother cool in her white dress, her child in her arms.
"Father had to go," she told him, and explained the need; "he'll send Calvin for the basket."
"I can carry my own basket, Mary; I'm not a thousand years old."
"It isn't that. But you've never carried baskets, Judge."
The Judge chuckled. "You say that as if it were an accusation."
"It isn't. Only some of us seem born to carry baskets and others are born to--let us carry them." Her smile redeemed her words from impertinence.
"Are you a Bolshevik, Mary?"
"No. I believe in the divine rights of kings and--Judges. I'd hate to see you carry a basket. It would rob you of something--just as I would hate to see a king without his crown or a queen without her scepter."
"Oh, Mary, Mary, your father has never said things like that to me."
"He doesn't feel them. Father believes in The God of Things as They are----"
"And don't you?"
"I believe in you," she rose and carrying her sleeping child, crossed the stream on the stones as easily as if she carried no burden; "you know I believe in you, don't you--and in all the Bannisters?"
It was said so lightly that he took it lightly. No one was so touchy as the Judge about his dignity if it were disregarded. But here was little Mary smiling up at him and telling him that he was a king with a crown and she liked it.
"Well, well. Let's sit down, Mary."
"Fish, if you want to, and I'll watch."
He baited his hook and cast his line into the stream. It had a bobbing red cork which fascinated Fiddle-dee-dee. She tried to wade out and get it, and had to be held by her very short skirts lest she drown in the attempt.
"So I'm a confounded autocrat," the Judge chuckled. "Nobody ever said that to me before, but maybe some of them have been thinking it."
"Maybe they have," said Mary gravely, "but they haven't really cared.
Having the Bannisters at Huntersfield is like the English having a Victoria or an Edward or a George at Buckingham Palace or at Windsor;
it adds flavor to their--democracy----"
"Mary--who's been saying all this to you?" he demanded.
"My husband."
"Truelove Branch?"
She nodded.
"I'd like to meet him, by Jove, I'd like to meet him. He has been teaching his wife to poke fun at her old friend----"
She faced him fearlessly. "I'm not poking fun. I--I'd hate to have the Bannisters lose one little bit of their beautiful traditions.
I--I---- Some day I'm going to teach little Fiddle those traditions, and tell her what it means when--when people have race back of them.
You see, I haven't it, Judge, but I know what it's worth."
He was touched by her earnestness. "My dear Mary," he said, "I wish my own grandson looked at it that way. His letters of late have been very disturbing."
A little flush crept into her cheeks. "Disturbing?"
"He writes that we Americans have got to fit our practice to our theories. He says that we shout democracy and practice autocracy.
That we don't believe that all men are free and equal, and that, well, in your words, Mary--we let other people carry our baskets."
Mary was smiling to herself. "You are glad he is coming home?"
"Truxton? Yes. On Saturday."
"Becky told me. She rode over to get Mother to help Mandy."
"I am going to have a lot of people to dine the day he arrives," said the Judge, "and next week there'll be the Merriweathers' ball. He will have a chance to see his old friends."
"Yes," said Mary, "he will."
They talked a great deal about Truxton after that.
"I wish he bore the Bannister name," said the Judge. "Becky is the only Bannister."
After the death of her husband Mrs. Beaufort had come to live with the Judge. Truxton's boyhood had been spent on the old estate. The Judge's income was small, and Truxton had known few luxuries. Like the rest of the boys of the Bannister family he was studying law at the University. He and Randy had been classmates, but had gone into different branches of the service.
"When he comes back," the Judge told Mary, "he must show the stuff he is made of. I can't have him selling cars around the county like Randy Paine."
"Well, Randy has sold a lot of them," said Mary. "Father has given him an order----"
"You don't mean to gay that Bob Flippin is going to buy a car----"
"He is."
"He didn't dare tell me," the Judge said; "what's he going to do with his horses?"
"Keep them," said Mary serenely; "the car is for Mother--she's going to drive it herself."
The Judge, with a vision of Mollie Flippin's middle-aged plumpness upon him, exclaimed: "You don't mean that your mother is going to--drive a car?"
"Yes," said Mary, "she is."
"I would as soon think of Claudia----"
"No," said Mary, "Mrs. Beaufort will never drive her own car. She has the coachman habit, and if she ever gets a car, there'll be a man at the wheel."
She brought the conversation back to Truxton. "Do you remember how we had a picnic here years ago, Mother packed the lunch, and Truxton ate up all the raspberry tarts?"
"He loved tarts," said the Judge, "and chocolate cake. Well, well, I shall be glad to see him."
"Perhaps--perhaps when he gets here you'll be disappointed."
"Why," sharply, "why should I?"
Mary did not answer. She stood up with Fiddle in her arms. "Calvin's coming for the basket," she said, "and I shall have to go up on the other side--I left the cart."
She said "good-bye" and crossed by the stepping-stones. The Judge wound up his fishing tackle. The day's sport resulted in three small "shiners." But he had enjoyed the day--there been the stillness and the sunlight, and the good company of Bob Flippin and his daughter Mary.
The dogs followed, and Mary from the other side of the stream watched the little procession, Calvin in the lead with the load, the Judge straight and slim with his fluff of white hair, the three little dogs paddling on their short legs.
"Judge Bannister of Huntersfield," said Mary Flippin. Then she raised Fiddle high in her arms. "Say _Granddad_, Fiddle," she whispered, "say _Granddad_."
II The Flippin farmhouse was wide and rambling. It had none of the classic elegance of the old Colonial mansions, but it had a hall in the middle with the sitting-room on one side and on the other an old-fashioned parlor with a bedroom back of it. The dining-room was back of the sitting-room, and beyond that was the kitchen, and a succession of detached buildings which served as dairy, granary, tool-house and carriage house in the old fashion. There was much sunlight and cleanliness in the farmhouse, and beauty of a kind, for the Flippins had been content with simple things, and Mary's taste was evidenced in the restraint with which the new had been combined with the old. She and her mother did most of the work. It was not easy in these days to get negroes to help. Daisy, the mulatto, had come down for the summer, but they had no assurance that when the winter came they could keep her. Divested of her high heels and city affectations, Daisy was just a darkey, of a rather plain, comfortable, efficient type. When Mary went in, she was getting supper.
"Has Mother come, Daisy?"
"No, Miss, she ain', an' yo' Poppa ain' come. An' me makin' biscuits."
"Your biscuits are always delicious, Daisy."
"An' me and John wants to go to the movies, Miss Mary. An' efen the supper is late."
"You can leave the dishes until mornin', Daisy."
Mary smiled and sighed as she went on with Fiddle to her own room. The good old days of ordered service were over.
She went into the parlor bedroom. It was the one which she and Fiddle occupied. She bathed and dressed her baby, and changed her own frock.
Then she entered the long, dim parlor. There was a family Bible on the table. It was a great volume with steel engravings. It had belonged to her father's father. In the middle of the book were pages for births and deaths. The records were written legibly but not elegantly.
They went back for two generations. Beyond that the Flippins had no family tree.
Mary had seen the family tree at Huntersfield. It was rooted in aristocratic soil. There were Huguenot branches and Royalist branches--D'Aubignes and Moncures, Peytons and Carys, Randolphs and Lees. And to match every name there was more than one portrait on the walls of Huntersfield.
Mary remembered a day when she and Truxton Beaufort had stood in the wide hall.
"A great old bunch," Truxton had said.
"If they were my ancestors I should be afraid of them."
"Why, Mary?"
"Oh, they'd expect so much of me."
"Oh, that," Truxton said airily, "who cares what they expect?"
Mr. and Mrs. Flippin came home in time for supper. The nurse had arrived and the surgeons would follow in the morning. "It's dreadful, Mary," Mrs. Flippin said, "to see her poor husband; money isn't everything. And he loves her as much as if they were poor."
Daisy washed the dishes in a perfect whirl of energy, donned her high-heeled slippers and her Washington manner, and went off with John.
It was late that night when Mrs. Flippin went out to find Mary busy.
"My dear," she said, "what are you doing?" Mary was rolling out pastry, with ice in a ginger-ale bottle. "I am going to make some tarts.
There was a can of raspberries left--and--and well--I'm just hungry for--raspberry tarts, Mother."
III It was the Judge who told Becky that Dalton had not gone. "Mrs.
Waterman is very ill, and they are all staying down."
Becky showed no sign of what the news meant to her, but that night pride and love fought in the last ditch. It seemed to Becky that with Dalton at King's Crest the agony of the situation was intensified.
"Oh, why should I care?" she kept asking herself as she sat late by her window. "He doesn't. And I have known him only three weeks. Why should he count so much?"
She knew that he counted to the measure of her own constancy. "I can't bear it," she said over and over again pitifully, as the hours passed.
"I think I shall--die."
It seemed to her that she wanted more than anything in the whole wide world to see him for a moment--to hear the quick voice--to meet the sparkle of his glance.
Well, why not? If she called him--he would come. She was sure of that. He was staying away because he thought that she cared. And he didn't want her to care. But he was not really--cruel--and if she called him---- She wandered around the room, stopping at a window and going on, stopping at another to stare out into the starless night. There had been rain, and there was that haunting wet fragrance from the garden.
"I must see him," she said, and put her hand to her throat.
She went down-stairs. Everybody was in bed. There was no one to hear.
Her grandfather's room was over the library; Mandy and Calvin slept in servants' quarters outside. To-morrow the house would be full of ears--and it would be too late.
A faint light burned in the lower hall. The stairway swept down from a sort of upper gallery, and all around the gallery and on the stairs and along the lower hall were the portraits of Becky's dead and gone ancestors.
They were really very worth-while ancestors, not as solid and substantial perhaps as those whose portraits hung in the Meredith house on Main Street in Nantucket, but none the less aristocratic, with a bit of dare-devil about the men, and a hint of frivolity about the women--with a pink coat here and a black patch there, with the sheen of satin and the sparkle of jewels--a Cavalier crowd, with the greatest ancestor of all in his curly wig and his sweeping plumes.
They stared at Becky as she went down-stairs, a little white figure in her thin blue dressing-gown, her bronze hair twisted into a curly topknot, her feet in small blue slippers.
The telephone was on a small table under the portrait of the greatest grandfather. He had a high nose, and a fine clear complexion, and he looked really very much alive as he gazed down at Becky.
She found the King's Crest number. It was a dreadful thing that she was about to do. Yet she was going to do it.
She reached for the receiver. Then suddenly her hand was stayed, for it seemed to her that into the silence her greatest grandfather shouted accusingly:
"_Where is your pride?_"
She found herself trying to explain. "But, Grandfather----"
The clamour of other voices assailed her:
"_Where is your pride?_"
They were flinging the question at her from all sides, those gentlemen in ruffles, those ladies in shining gowns.
Becky stood before them like a prisoner at the bar--a slight child, yet with the look about her of those lovely ladies, and with eyes as clear as those of the old Governor who had accused her.
"But I love him----"
It was no defense and she knew it. Not one of those lovely ladies would have tried to call a lover back, not one of them but would have died rather than show her hurt. Not one of those slender and sparkling gentlemen but would have found swords or pistols the only settlement for Dalton's withdrawal at such a moment.
And she was one of them--one of that prideful group. There came to her a sense of strength in that association. What had been done could be done again. Other women had hidden broken hearts. Other women had held their heads high in the face of disappointment and defeat. There were traditions of the steadfastness of those smiling men and women.
Some day, perhaps, she would have her portrait painted, and she would be--smiling.
She had no fear now of their glances, as she passed them on the stairs, as she met them in the upper hall. What she had to bear she must bear in silence, and bear it like a Bannister.
CHAPTER IX "T. BRANCH"
I Dalton felt that Fate had played a shabby trick. He had planned a graceful exit and the curtain had stuck; he had wanted to run away, and he could not. Flora was very ill, and it was, of course, out of the question to desert Oscar.
Madge had been sent for. She was to arrive on the noon train. He had promised Oscar that he would drive down for her. The house was in a hubbub. There were two trained nurses, and a half-dozen doctors. The verdict was unanimous, Flora could not be moved, and an operation was imperative.
And in the meantime there was the thought of Becky beating at his heart. With miles between them, the thing would have been easy. Other interests would have crowded her out. But here she was definitely within reach--and he wanted her. He wanted her more than he had ever wanted Madge, more than he had ever wanted any other woman. There had been a sweetness about her, a dearness.
He thought it over as he lay in bed waiting for his breakfast. Since waking, he had led Kemp a life of it.