"You didn't bring me down here to tell me that----" But in spite of himself the corners of his lips curled. "Oh, what's the answer, Madge?" he said, and laughed in spite of himself.
"I wanted to talk a little about--your Becky."
His laughter died at once. "Well, I'm not going to talk about her."
"Please--I am dying of curiosity--I hear that she is very--rich, Georgie."
"Rich?"
"Yes. She has oodles of money----"
"I don't believe it."
"But it is true, Georgie."
"Who told you?"
"Mrs. Flippin."
"It is all--rot----"
"It isn't rot, Georgie. Mrs. Flippin knows about it. Becky inherits from her Meredith grandmother. And her grandfather is Admiral Meredith of Nantucket, with a big house on Beacon Street in Boston. And they all belong to the inner circle."
He stared at her. "But Becky doesn't look it. She doesn't wear rings and things."
"'Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes'? Oh, George, did you think it had to be like that When people had money? Why, her pearls belonged to a queen." She told him their history.
It came back to him with a shock that he had said to Becky that the pearls cheapened her. "If they were _real_," he had said.
"It was rather strange the way I found it out," Madge was saying.
"Mary Flippin had on the most perfect gown--with all the marks on it of exclusive Fifth Avenue. She was going to the Merriweather ball, and Becky is to be there."
She saw him gather himself together. "It is rather a Cinderella story, isn't it?" he asked, with assumed lightness.
"Yes," she said, "but I thought you'd like to know."
"What if I knew already?"
She laughed and let it go at that. "I'm lonesome, Georgie, talk to me," she said. But he was not in a mood to talk. And at last she sent him away. And when he had gone she sat there a long time and thought about him. There had been look in his eyes which made her almost sorry. It seemed incredible as she came to think of it that anybody should ever be sorry for Georgie.
II Since that night with Becky in the garden at Huntersfield George had been torn by conflicting emotions. He knew himself at last in love.
He knew himself beaten at the game by a little shabby girl, and a lanky youth who had been her champion.
He would not acknowledge that the thing was ended, and in the end he had written her a letter. He cried to Heaven that a marriage between her and young Paine would be a crime. "How can you love him, Becky--you are mine."
The letter had been returned unopened. His burning phrases might have been dead ashes for all the good they had done. She had not read them.
And now Madge had told him the unbelievable thing--that Becky Bannister, the shabby Becky of the simple cottons and the stubbed shoes, was rich, not as Waterman was rich, flamboyantly, vulgarly, with an eye to letting all the world know. But rich in a thoroughbred fashion, scorning display--he knew the kind, secure in a knowledge of the unassailable assets of birth and breeding and solid financial standing.
No wonder young Paine wanted to marry her. George, driving through the night, set his teeth. He was seeing Randy, poor as Job's turkey, with Becky's money for a background.
Well, he should not have it. He should not have Becky.
George headed the car for the Merriweathers'. Becky was there, and he was going to see Becky. How he was to see her he left to the inspiration to the moment.
He parked his car by the road, and walked through the great stone gates. The palatial residence was illumined from top to bottom, its windows great squares of gold against the night. The door stood open, but except for a servant or two there was no one in the wide hall. The guests were dancing in the ballroom at the back, and George caught the lilt of the music as he skirted the house, then the sound of voices, the light laughter of the women, the deeper voices of the men.
The little balconies, lighted by the yellow lanterns, were empty. As soon as the music stopped they would be filled with dancers seeking the coolness of the outer air. He stood looking up, and suddenly, as if the stage had been set, Becky stepped out on the balcony straight in front of him, and stood under the yellow lantern. The light was dim, but it gave to her white skin, to her lace frock, to the pink fan, a faint golden glow. She might have been transmuted from flesh into some fine metal. George had not heard the Major's name for her, "Mademoiselle Midas," but he had a feeling that the little golden figure was symbolic--here was the real Golden Girl for him--not Madge or any other woman.
Randy was with her, back in the shadow, but unmistakable, his lean height, the lift of his head.
George moved forward until, hidden by a bush, he was almost under the balcony. He could catch the murmur of their voices. But not a word that they said was intelligible.
They were talking of Mary. Her introduction to her husband's friends had been an ordeal for Bob Flippin's daughter. But she had gone through it simply, quietly, unaffectedly, with the Judge by her side standing sponsor for his son's wife in chivalrous and stately fashion, with Mrs. Beaufort at her elbow helping her over the initial small talk of her presentation. With Truxton beaming, and with Becky drawing her into that charmed circle of the younger set which might so easily have shut her out. More than one of those younger folk had had it in mind that at last year's ball Mary Flippin had sat in the gallery. But not even the most snobbish of them would have dared to brave Becky Bannister's displeasure. Back of her clear-eyed serenity was a spirit which flamed and a strength which accomplished. Becky was an amiable young person who could flash fire at unfairness or injustice or undue assumption of superiority.
The music had stopped and the balconies were filled. George, in the darkness, was aware of the beauty of the scene--the lantern making yellow moons--the golden groups beneath them. Mary and Truxton with a friend or two were in the balcony adjoining the one where Becky sat with young Paine.
"Isn't she a dear and a darling, Randy?" Becky was saying; "and how well she carries it off. Truxton is so proud of her, and she is so pretty."
"She can't hold a candle to you, Becky."
"It is nice of you to say it." She leaned on the stone balustrade and swung her fan idly.
"I am not saying it to be nice."
"Aren't you--oh----!" She gave a quick exclamation.
"What's the matter?"
"I dropped my fan."
"I'll go and get it," he said, and just then the music started.
"No," said Becky, "never mind now. This is your dance with Mary--and she mustn't be kept waiting."
"Aren't you dancing this?"
"It is Truxton's, and I begged off. Run along, dear boy."
When he was gone she leaned over the rail. Below was a tangle of bushes, and the white gleam of a stone bench. Beyond the bushes was a path, and farther on a fountain. It was a rather imposing fountain, with a Neptune in bronze riding a sea-horse, with nymphs on dolphins in attendance. Neptune poured water from a shell which he held in his hand, and the dolphins spouted great streams. The splash of the water was a grateful sound in the stillness of the hot night, and the mist which the slight breeze blew towards a bed of tuberoses seemed to bring out their heavy fragrance. Always afterwards when Becky thought of that night, there would come to her again that heavy scent and the splash of streaming water.
"Becky," a voice came up from below, "I have your fan."
She peered down into the darkness, but did not speak.
"Becky, I am punished, enough, and I am--starved for you----"
"Give me my fan----"
"I want to talk to you--I must--talk to you."
"Give me my fan----"
"I can't reach----"
"You can stand on that bench."
He stood on it, and she could see his figure faintly defined.
"I am afraid I am still too far away. Lean over a bit, Becky--and I'll hand it to you."
She stretched her white arm down into the darkness. Her hand was caught in a strong clasp. "Becky, give me just five minutes by the fountain."
"Let me go."
"Not until you promise that you'll come."
"I shall never promise."
"Then I shall keep your fan----"
"Keep it--I have others."
"But you will think about this one, because I have it." There was a note of triumph in his soft laugh.
He kissed her finger-tips and reluctantly released her hand. "The fan is mine, then, until you ask for it."
"I shall never ask."
"Who knows? Some day you may--who knows?" and he was gone.
He could not have chosen a better way in which to fire her imagination.
His voice in the dark, his laughing triumph, the daring theft of her fan. Her heart followed him, seeing him a Conqueror even in this, seeing him a robber with his rose-colored booty, a Robin Hood of the Garden, a Dick Turpin among the tuberoses.
The spirit of Romance went with him. The things that Pride had done for her looked gray and dull. She had promised to marry Randy, and felt that she faced a somewhat sober future. Set against it was all that George had given her, the sparkle and dash and color of his ardent pursuit.
He was not worth a thought, yet she thought of him. She was still thinking of him when Randy came back.
"Did you get your fan?" he asked.
"No. Never mind, Randy. I will have one of the servants look for it."
"But I do mind."
She hesitated. "Well, don't look for it now. Let's go in and join the others. Are they going down to supper?"
Supper was served in the great Hunt Room, which was below the ballroom.
It was a historic and picturesque place, and had been the scene for over a century of merry-making before and after the fox-hunts for which the county was famous. There were two great fireplaces, almost hidden to-night by the heaped-up fruits of the harvest, orange and red and green, with cornstalks and goldenrod from the fields for decorations.
Becky found Mary alone at a small table in a corner. Truxton had left her to forage for refreshments and Randy followed him.
"Are you having a good time, Mary?"
Mary did not answer at once. Then she said, bravely, "I don't quite fit in, Becky. I am still an--outsider."
"Oh, Mary!"
"I am not--unhappy, and Truxton is such a dear. But I shall be glad to get home, Becky."
"But you look so lovely, Mary, and everybody seems so kind."
"They are, but underneath I am just plain--Mary Flippin. They know that, and so do I, and it will take them some time to forget it."
There was an anxious look in Becky's eyes. "It seems to me that you are feeling it more than the others."
"Perhaps. And I shouldn't have said anything. Don't let Truxton know."
"Has anyone said anything to hurt you, Mary?"
"No, but when I dance with the men, I can't speak their language. I haven't been to the places--I don't know the people. I am on the outside."
Becky had a sudden forlorn sense that things were wrong with the whole world. But she didn't want Mary to be unhappy.
"Truxton loves you," she said, "and you love him. Don't let anything make you miserable when you have--that. Nothing else counts, Mary."
There was a note of passion in her voice which brought a pulsing response from Mary.
"It _is_ the only thing that counts, Becky. How silly I am to worry."
Her young husband was coming towards her--flushed and eager, a prince among men, and he was hers!
As he sat down beside her, her hand sought his under the table.
He looked down at her. "Happy, little girl?"
"Very happy, lover."
III Caroline Paine was having the time of her life. She wore a new dress of thin midnight blue which Randy had bought for her and which was very becoming; her hair was waved and dressed, and she had Major Prime as an attentive listener while she talked of the past and linked it with the present.
"Of course there was a time when the men drank themselves under the tables. Everybody calls them the 'good old times,' but I reckon they were bad old times in some ways, weren't they? There was hot blood, and there were duels. There's no denying it was picturesque, Major, but it was foolish for all that. Men don't settle things now by shooting each other, except in a big way like the war. The last duel was fought by the old fountain out there--one of the Merriweathers met one of the Paines. Merriweather was killed, and the girl died of a broken heart."
"Then it was Merriweather that she loved?"
"Yes. And young Paine went abroad, and joined the British army and was killed in India. So nobody was happy, and all because there was, probably, a flowing bowl at the harvest ball. I am glad they don't do it that way now. Just think of my Randy stripped to his shirt and with pistols for two. We are more civilized in these days and I'm glad of it."
"Are we?" said the Major; "I'm not sure. But I hope so."
Randy came by just then and spoke to them. "Are you getting everything you want, Mother?"
"Yes, indeed. The Major looked after me. I've had salad twice, and everything else----"
"That sounds greedy, but it isn't, not when you think of the groaning boards of other days. Has she been telling you about them, Major?"
"Yes, she has peopled the room with ghosts----"
"Now, Major!"
"Pleasant ghosts--in lace ruffles and velvet coats, smoking long pipes around a punch bowl; beautiful ghosts in patches and powder," he made an expressive gesture; "they have mingled with the rest of you--shadow-shapes of youth and loveliness."
"Well, if anybody can tell about it, Mother can," said Randy, "but I don't believe there were ever any prettier girls than are here to-night."
"Becky looks like an angel," Mrs. Paine stated, "but she's pale, Randy."
"She is tired, Mother. I think she ought to go home. I shall try to make her when I come back. She dropped her fan and I am going to get it."
He had not told Becky where he was going. He had slipped away--his mind intent on regaining her property. But when he reached the bushes and flashed his pocket-light on the ground beneath, there was no fan.
It must have fallen here. He was sure he had made no mistake.
He decided finally that someone else had found it. It seemed unlikely, however, for the spot was remote, and the thickness of the bushes offered a barrier to anyone strolling casually through the grounds.
He went slowly back to the house. Ever since that night when Becky had said she would marry him he had lived in a dream. They were pledged to each other, yet she did not love him. How could he take her? And again, how could he give her up? She had offered herself freely, and he wanted her in his future. And there was a fighting chance. He had youth and courage and a love for her he challenged any man to match.
Why not? Was it beyond the bounds of reason that some day he could make Becky love him?
They had agreed that no one was to be told. "Not until I come back from Nantucket," Becky had stipulated.
"By that time you won't want me, my dear."
"Well, I shan't if you talk like that," Becky had said with some spirit.
"Like what?"
"As if I were a queen and you were a slave. When you were a little boy you bossed me, Randy."
There had been a gleam in his eye. "I may again."
He wondered if, after all, that would be the way to win her. Yet he shrank from playing a game. When she came to him, if she ever came, it must be because she found something in him that was love-worthy. At least he could make himself worthy of love, whether she ever came to him or not.
He stopped by the fountain; just beyond it the long windows of the Hunt Room opened out upon the lawn. The light lay in golden squares upon the grass. Randy, still in the shadow, stood for a moment looking in.
There were long tables and little ones, kaleidoscopic color, movement and light, and Becky back in her corner in the midst of a gay group.
He was aware, suddenly, that he was not the only one who watched. Half hidden by the shadows of one of the great pillars of the lower porch was a man in light flannels and a gray cap.
He was not skulking, and indeed he seemed to have a splendid indifference to discovery. He was staring at Becky and in his hand, a blaze of lovely color against his coat, was Becky's fan!
Randy took a step forward. George turned and saw him.
"I was looking for that," Randy said, and held out his hand for the fan.
But Dalton did not give it to him. "She knows I have it."
"How could she know?" Randy demanded; "she dropped it from the balcony."
"And I was under the balcony"--George's laugh was tantalising,--"a patient Romeo."
"You picked it up."
"I picked it up. And she knew that I did. Didn't she tell you?"
She had not told him. He remembered now her unwillingness to have him search, for it.
He had no answer for George. But again he held out his hand.
"She will be glad to get it. Will you give it to me?"
"She told me I might--keep it."
"Keep it----?"
"For remembrance."
There was a tense pause. "If that is true," said Randy, "there is, of course, nothing else for me to say."
He turned to go, but George stopped him. "Wait a minute. You are going to marry her?"
"Yes."
"And she is very--rich."
"Her money does not enter into the matter."
"Some people might think it did. There are those who might be unkind enough to call you a--fortune-hunter."
"I shall be called nothing of the kind by those who know me."
"But there are so many who don't know you."
"I wonder," said Randy, fiercely, "why I am staying here and letting you say such things to me. There is nothing you can say which can hurt me. Becky knows--God knows, that I wish she were as poor as poverty.
Perhaps money doesn't mean as much to us as it does to yon. I wish I had it, yes--so that I could give it to her. But love for us means a tent in the desert--a hut on a mountain--it can never mean what we could buy with money."
"Does love mean to her," George's tone was incisive, "a tent in the desert, a hut on a mountain?"
Randy's anger flamed. "I think," he said, "that I should beg Becky's pardon for bringing her name into this at all---- And now, will you give me her fan?"
"When she asks for it--yes."
Randy was breathing heavily. "Will you give me her--fan----"
The mist from the fountain blew cool against his hot cheeks. The water which old Neptune poured from his shell flashed white under the stars.
"Let her ask for it----" George's laugh was light.
It was that laugh which made Randy see red. He caught George's wrists suddenly in his hands. "Drop it."
George stopped laughing. "Let her ask for it," he said again.
Randy twisted the wrists. It was a cruel trick. But his Indian blood was uppermost.
"Drop it," he said, with another twist, and the fan fell.
But Randy was not satisfied. "Do you think," he said, "that I am through with you? What you need is tar and feathers, but failing that----" he did not finish his sentence. He caught George around the body and began to push him back towards the fountain.
George fought doggedly--but Randy was strong with the muscular strength of youth and months of military training.
"I'll kill you for this," George kept saying.
"No," said Randy, conserving his breath, "they don't--do it--in--these--days----"
He had Dalton now at the rim and with a final effort of strength he lifted him--there was a splash, and into the deeps of the great basin went George, while the bronze Neptune, and the bronze dolphins, and the nymphs with flowing hair, splashed and spouted a welcoming chorus that drowned his cry!
Randy, head up, eyes shining, marched into the house and had a servant brush him off and powder a scratch on his chin; then he went down-stairs to the Hunt Room and strode across the room until he came to where Becky sat in her corner.
"I found your fan," he told her, and laid it, a blaze of lovely color, on the table in front of her.
CHAPTER XIII THE WHISTLING SALLY I Becky, as she journeyed towards the north, had carried with her a vision of a new and rather disturbing Randy--a Randy who, striding across the Hunt Room with high-held head, had delivered her fan, and had, later, asked for an explanation.
"How did he get it, Becky?"
She had told him.
"Why didn't you tell me when I came back and said I would go for it?"
"I was afraid he might still be there."
"Well?"
"And that something might happen."
Something had happened later by the fountain. But Randy did not speak of it. "I saw the fan in his hand and asked for it," grimly, "and he gave it to me----"
On the night before she went away, Randy had said, "I can't tell you all that you mean to me, Becky, and I am not going to try. But I am yours always--remember that----" He had kissed her hand and held it for a moment against his heart. Then he had left her, and Becky had wanted to call him back and say something that she felt had been left unsaid, but had found that she could not.
Admiral Meredith met his granddaughter in New York, and the rest of the trip was made with him.
Admiral Meredith was as different from Judge Bannister in his mental equipment as he was in physical appearance. He was a short little man, who walked with a sailor's swing, and who laughed like a fog-horn. He had ruddy cheeks, and the manners of a Chesterfield. If he lacked the air of aristocratic calm which gave distinction to Judge Bannister, he supplied in its place a sophistication due to his contact with a world which moved faster than the Judge's world in Virginia.
He adored Becky, and resented her long sojourn in the South. "I believe you love the Judge better than you do me," he told her, as he turned to her in the taxi which took them from the train to the boat.
"I don't love anybody better than I do you," she said, and tucked her hand in his.
"What have they been doing to you?" he demanded; "you are as white as paper."
"Well, it has been hot."
"Of all the fool things to keep you down here in summer. I am going to take you straight to 'Sconset to the Whistling Sally and keep you there for a month."
"The Whistling Sally" was the Admiral's refuge when he was tired of the world. It was a gray little house set among other gray little houses across the island from Nantucket town. It stood on top of the bluff and overlooked a sea which stretched straight to Spain. It was called "The Whistling Sally" because a ship's figure-head graced its front yard, the buxom half of a young woman who blew out her cheeks in a perpetual piping, and whose faded colors spoke eloquently of the storms which had buffeted her.
The Admiral, as has been indicated, had an imposing mansion in Nantucket town. For two months in the summer he entertained his friends in all the glory of a Colonial background--white pillars, spiral stairway, polished floors, Chinese Chippendale, lacquered cabinets, old china and oil portraits. He gave dinners and played golf, he had a yacht and a motor boat, he danced when the spirit moved him, and was light on his feet in spite of his years. He was adored by the ladies, lionized by everybody, and liked it.
But when the summer was over and September came, he went to Siasconset and reverted to the type of his ancestors. He hobnobbed with the men and women who had been the friends and neighbors of his forbears. He doffed his sophistication as he doffed his formal clothes. He wore a slicker on wet days, and the rain dripped from his rubber hat. He sat knee to knee with certain cronies around the town pump. He made chowder after a famous recipe, and dug clams when the spirit moved him.
His housekeeper, Jane, adjourned from the town house to "The Whistling Sally" when Becky was there; at other times the Admiral did for himself, keeping the little cottage as neat as a pin, and cooking as if he were born to it.
It seemed to Becky that as the long low island rose from the sea, the burdens which she had carried for so long dropped from her. There were the houses on the cliff, the glint of a gilded dome, and then, gray and blue and green the old town showed against the skyline, resolving itself presently into roofs, and church towers, and patches of trees, with long piers stretching out through shallow waters, boat-houses, fishing smacks, and at last a thin line of people waiting on the wharf.
The air was like wine. The sky was blue with the deep sapphire which follows a wind-swept night. There was not a hint of mist or fog.
Flocks of gulls rose and dipped and rose again, or rested unafraid on the wooden posts of the pier.
The 'Sconset 'bus was waiting and they took it. Until two years ago no automobiles had been allowed on the island, but there had been the triumph of utility over the picturesque and quaint, and now one motored across the moor on smooth asphalt, in one-half the time that the trip had been made in the old days.
The Admiral did not like it. He admitted that it was quicker. "But we used to see the pheasants fly up from the bushes, and the ducks from the pools, and now they are gone before we can get our eyes on them."
Becky was not in a captious mood. The moor was before her, rising and falling in low unwooded hills, amber with dwarf goldenrod, red with the turning huckleberry, purple with drying grasses; green with a thousand lovely growing things still unpainted by the brush of autumn. The color was almost unbelievably gorgeous. Even the pools by the roadside were almost unbelievably blue, as if the water had been dyed with indigo, and above all was that incredible blue sky----!
Then out of the distance clear cut like cardboard the houses lifted themselves above the horizon, with the sea a wall to the right, and to the left, across the moor, the Sankaty lighthouse, white and red with the sun's rays striking across it.
They entered the village between rows of pleasant informal residences, many of them closed until another season; they passed the tennis courts, and came to the post-office, with its flag flying. The 'bus stopped, and they found Tristram waiting for them.
"Tristram" is an old name in Nantucket. There was a Tristram among the nine men who had purchased the Island from Thomas Mayhew in 1659 for "30 pounds current pay and two beaver hats." The present Tristram wore the name appropriately. Fair-haired and tall, not young but towards the middle-years, strong with the strength of one who lives out-of-doors in all weathers, browned with the wind and sun, blue-eyed, he called no man master, and was the owner of his own small acres.
Like the Admiral, he gave himself up for two months of the year to the summer people. If his association with them was a business rather than a social affair, it was, none the less, interesting. The occupation of Nantucket by "off-islanders" was a matter of infinite speculation and amusement. Into the serenity of his life came restless men and women who golfed and swam and rode and danced, who chafed when it rained, and complained of the fog, who seemed endlessly trying to get something out of life and who were endlessly bored, who wondered how Tristram could stand the solitudes and who pitied him.
Tristram knew that he did not need their pity. He had a thousand things that they did not have. He was never bored, and he was too busy to manufacture amusements. There were always things happening on the island--each day brought something different.
To-day, it was the winter gulls. "They are coming down--lots of them from the north," he told the Admiral as they drove through the quaint settlement with its gray little houses, "the big ones----"
There was also the _gerardia_, pale pink and shading into mauve. He had brought a great bunch to "The Whistling Sally," and had put it in a bowl of gray pottery.
When Becky saw the flowers, she knew whom to thank. "Oh, Tristram,"
she said, "you found them on the moor."
Tristram, standing in the little front room of the Admiral's cottage, seemed to tower to the ceiling. "The Whistling Sally" from the outside had the look of a doll's house, too small for human habitation. Within it was unexpectedly commodious. It had the shipshape air of belonging to a seafaring man. The rooms were all on one floor. There was the big front room, which served as a sitting-room and dining-room. It had a table built out from the wall with high-backed benches on each side of it, and a rack for glasses overhead. There was a window above the table which looked out towards the sea. The walls were painted blue, and there was an old brick fireplace. A model of a vessel from which the figure-head in the front yard had been taken was over the mantel, flanked by an old print or two of Nantucket in the past. There were Windsor chairs and a winged chair; some pot-bellied silver twinkled in a corner cupboard.
The windows throughout were low and square and small-paned and white-curtained. The day was cool, and there was a fire on the hearth.
The blaze and the pink flowers, and the white curtains gave to the little room an effect of brightness, although outside the early twilight was closing in.
Jane came in with her white apron and added another high light. She kissed Becky. "Did your grandfather tell you that Mr. Cope is coming over to have chowder?" she asked.
It would be impossible to describe Jane's way of saying "chowder." It had no "r," and she clipped it off at the end. But it is the only way in the world, and the people who so pronounce it are usually the only people in the world who can make it.
"Who is Mr. Cope?" Becky asked.
Mr. Cope, it seemed, had a cottage across the road from the Admiral's.
He leased it, and it was his first season at 'Sconset. His sister had been with him only a week ago. She had gone "offshore," but she was coming back.
"Is he young?" Becky asked.
"Well, he isn't old," said Jane, "and he's an artist."
Becky was not in the least interested in Mr. Cope, go she talked to Tristram until he had to go back to his farm and the cows that waited to be milked. Then Becky went into her room, and took off her hat and coat and ran a comb through the bronze waves of her hair. She did not change the straight serge frock in which she had travelled. She went back into the front room and found that Mr. Cope had come.
He was not old. That was at once apparent. And he was not young. He did not look in the least like an artist. He seemed, rather, like a prosperous business man. He wore a Norfolk suit, and his reddish hair was brushed straight back from his forehead. He had rather humorous gray eyes, and Becky thought there was a look of delicacy about his white skin. Later he spoke of having come for his health, and she learned that he had a weak heart.
He had a pleasant laughing voice. He belonged to Boston, but had lived abroad for years.
"With nothing to show for it," he told her with a shrug, "but one portrait. I painted my sister, and she kept that. But before we left Paris we burned the rest----"
"Oh, how dreadful," Becky cried.
"No, it wasn't dreadful. They were not worth keeping. You see, I played a lot and made sketches and things, and then there was the war--and I wasn't very well."
He had had two years of aviation, and after that a desk in the War Department.
"And now I am painting again."
"Gardens?" Becky asked, "or the sea?"
"Neither. I am trying to paint the moor. I'll show you in the morning."
The Admiral was in the kitchen, superintending the chowder. Jane knew how to make it, and he knew that she knew. But he always went into the kitchen at the psychological moment, tied on an apron, and put in the pilot crackers. Then he brought the chowder in, in a big porcelain tureen which was shaped like a goose. Becky loved him in his white apron, with his round red face, and the porcelain goose held high.
"If you could paint him like that," she suggested to Archibald Cope.
"Do you think he would let me?" eagerly.
After supper the two men smoked by the fire, and Becky sat between them and watched the blaze. She heard very little of the conversation. Her mind was in Albemarle. How far away it seemed! Just three nights ago she had danced at the Merriweathers' ball, and George had held her hand as she leaned over the balcony.
"If you can bring yourself back for a moment, Becky, to present company," her grandfather was saying, "you can tell Mr. Cope whether you will walk with us to-morrow to Tom Never's."
"I'd love it."
"Really?" Cope asked. "You are sure you won't be too tired?"
"Not in this air. I feel as if I could walk forever."
"How about a bit of a walk to-night--up to the bluff? Is it too late, Admiral?"
"Not for you two. I'll finish my pipe, and read my papers."
The young people followed the line of the bluff until they came to an open space which looked towards the east. To the left of them was the ridge with a young moon hanging low above it, and straight ahead, brighter than the moon, whitening the heavens, stretching out and out until it reached the sailors in their ships, was the Sankaty light.
"I always come out to look at it before I go to bed," said Cope; "it is such a _living_ thing, isn't it?"
The wind was rising and they could hear the sound of the sea. Becky caught her breath. "On dark nights I like to think how it must look to the ships beyond the shoals----"
"The sea is cruel," said Cope; "that's why I don't paint it."
"Oh, it isn't always cruel."
"When isn't it? Last year, with the submarines, it was--a monster. I saw a picture once in a gallery, 'The Eternal Siren,' just the sea.
And a woman asked, 'Where's the Siren?'"
Becky laughed. "If you had sailor blood in you, you wouldn't feel that way. Ask Grandfather."
"The Admiral is prejudiced. He loves--the siren----"
"He would tell you that the sea isn't a siren. It's a bold, blustering lass like the Whistling Sally out there in the front yard. Man has tamed her even if he hasn't quite mastered her."
"He will never master her. She will go on and on, after we are dead, through the ages, wooing men to--destruction----"
Becky shivered. "I hate to think of things--after we are dead."
"Do you? I don't. I like to think way beyond the ages to the time when there shall be no more sea----"
He pulled himself up abruptly. "I am talking rather dismally, I am afraid, about death and destruction. You won't want to walk with me again."
"Oh, yes, I shall. And I want to see your pictures."
"You may not care for them. Lots of people don't. But I have to work in my own way----"
As they walked back, he told her what he was trying to do. As she listened, Becky seemed to have two minds, one that caught his words, and answered them, and another which went back and back to the things which had happened since she had last walked this bluff with the wind in her face and the sound of the sea in her ears.
It seemed to her as if a lifetime had elapsed since last she had looked at the Sankaty light.
II When Becky wrote to Randy, she had a great deal to say about Archibald Cope.
"He is trying to paint the moor. He wants to get its meaning, and then make other people see what it means. He doesn't look in the least like that, Randy--as if he were finding the spirit of things. He has red hair and wears correct clothes, and says the right things, and you feel as if he ought to be in Wall Street buying bonds. But here he is, refusing to believe that anything he has done is worth while until he does it to his own satisfaction.
"We walked to Tom Never's Head yesterday. It was one of those clear silver days, a little cloudy and without much color. The cranberries are ripe and the moor was carpeted with them. When we got to Tom Never's we sat on the edge of the bluff, and Mr. Cope told me what he meant about the moor. It has its moods, he said. On a quiet, cloudy morning, it is a Quaker lady. With the fog in, it is a White Spirit.
There are purple twilights when it is--Cleopatra, and windy nights with the sun going down blood-red, when it is--Medusa---- He says that the trouble with the average picture is that it is just--paint. I am not sure that I understand it all, but it is terribly interesting. And when he had talked a lot about that, he talked of the history of the island. He said that he should never be satisfied until somebody put a bronze statue of an Indian right where we stood, with his back to the sea. And when I said, 'Why with his back to it?' he said, 'Wasn't the sea cruel to the red man? It brought a conquering race in ships.'
"I told him then about our Indians in Virginia, and that some of us had a bit of red blood in our veins, and I told him that you and I always used the old Indian war cry when we called to each other, and he asked, 'Who is Randy?' and I said that you were an old friend, and that we had spent much of our childhood together."
As a matter of fact, Cope had been much interested in her account of young Paine. "Do you mean to say that he is still living on all that land?"
"Yes."
"Master of his own domain. I can't see it. The way I like to live is with a paint box, and a bag; and nothing to keep me from moving on."
"We aren't like that in the South."
"Do you like to stay in one place?"
"I never have. I have always been handed around."
"Would you like a home of your own?"
"Of course--after I am married."
"North, south, east or west?"
She put the question to him seriously. "Do you think it would make any difference if you loved a man, where you lived?"
"Well, of course, there might be difficulties--on a desert island."
"Not if you loved him."
"My sister wouldn't agree with you."
"Why not?"
"She is very modern. She says that love has nothing to do with it.
Not romantic love. She says that when she marries she shall choose a man who lives in New York, who likes to go to Europe, and who hates the tropics. He must fancy pale gray walls and willow-green draperies, and he must loathe Florentine furniture. He must like music and painting, and not care much for books. He must adore French cooking, and have a prejudice against heavy roasts. He must be a Republican and High Church. She is sure that with such a man she would be happy. The dove of peace would hover over the household, because she and her husband would have nothing to quarrel about."
"Of course she doesn't mean it."
"She thinks she does."
"She won't if she is ever really in love."
He glanced at her. "Then you believe in the desert island?"
"I think I do----"
She stood up. "Did you feel a drop of rain? And Grandfather is waving."
The Admiral on the porch of the closed Lodge was calling to them to come under shelter.
It was a gentle rain, and they decided to walk home in it. They went at a smart pace, which they moderated as Cope showed signs of fatigue.
"It's a beastly nuisance," he said, "to give out. I wish you would go on ahead, and let me rest here----"
They rested with him. The two men talked, and Becky was rather silent.
When they started on again, Cope said to her, "Are you tired? It is a long walk."
"No," she said, "I am not tired. And I have been thinking a lot about the things you said to me."
He was not a conceited man, and he was aware that it was the things which he had said to her which had set her mind to work, not any personal fascination. She was quaint and charming, and he was glad that she had come. He had been lonely since his sister left. And his loneliness had fear back of it.
It was because of this conversation with Cope that Becky ended her letter to Randy with the following paragraph:
"Mr. Cope has a sister, Louise. She thinks that people ought to marry because they like the same things. She thinks that if two people care for the same furniture and the same religion and the same things to eat, that life will be lovely. She couldn't love a man enough to live on a desert island with him, because she adores New York. Of course, there is something in that, and if it is so, you and I ought to be very happy, Randy. We like old houses and the Virginia hills, and lots of books, and fireplaces--and dogs and horses and hot biscuits and fried chicken. It sounds awfully funny to put it that way, doesn't it, and practical? But perhaps Louise Cope is right, and one isn't likely, of course, to have the desert island test. Do you _really_ think that anybody could be happy on a desert island, Randy?"
Randy replied promptly.
"If you were in love with me, Becky, you wouldn't be asking questions.
You would believe that we could be blissful on a desert island. I believe it. It may not be true, yet I feel that a hut on a mountain top would be heaven for me if you were in it, Becky. In a way Cope's sister is right. The chances for happiness are greatest with those who have similar tastes, but not fried chicken tastes or identical religious opinions. These do not mean so much, but it would mean a great deal that we think alike about honesty and uprightness and truth and courage---- "And now, Becky, I might as well say it straight from the shoulder. I haven't the least right in the world to let you feel that you are engaged to me. I shall never marry you unless you love me--unless you love me so much that you would have the illusion of happiness with me on a desert island.
"I have no right to let you tie yourself to me. The whole thing is artificial and false. You are strong enough to stand alone. I want you to stand alone, Becky, for your own sake. I want you to tell yourself that Dalton isn't worth one single thought of yours. Tell yourself the truth, Becky, about him. It is the only way to own your soul.
"You may be interested to know that the Watermans left Hamilton Hill yesterday. Dalton went with them. I haven't seen him since the night of the Merriweathers' ball. I didn't tell you, did I, that after I took the fan away from him, I dropped him into the fountain? I had much rather have tied him to a stake, and have built a fire under him, but that isn't civilized, and of course, I couldn't. But I am glad I dropped him in the fountain----"
Becky read Randy's letter as she sat alone on the beach. It was cool and sunshiny and she was wrapped in a red cape. The winter gulls were beating strong wings above the breakers, and their sharp cries cut across the roar of the waters.
There had been a storm the night before--wind booming out of the northeast and the sea still sang the song of it.
Becky felt, suddenly, that she was very angry with Randy. It was as if he had broken a lovely thing that she had worshipped. She hated to think of that struggle in the dark---- She hated to think of Randy as--the Conqueror. She hated to think of George as dank and dripping.
She wanted to think of him as shining and splendid, and Randy had spoiled that.
But she wanted to be fair. Hadn't George, after all, spoiled his own splendidness? He had wooed her and had run away. And he had not run back until he thought another man wanted her.
"Of course," said somebody behind her, "you won't tell me what you are thinking about. But if you will just let me sit here and think, by your side, it will be a great privilege."
It was Mr. Cope, and she was not sure that she wanted him at this moment. Perhaps something of her thought showed in her eyes, for when she said, "Oh, yes," he stood looking down at her. "Would you rather be alone with your letters? Don't hedge and be polite. Tell me."
"Well," she admitted, "my letters are a bit on my mind. But if you don't care if I am stupid, you can stay----"
He sat down. He had known her for ten days, and dreaded to think that in ten days more she might be gone. "I won't talk if you don't wish it."
Becky's eyes were on the sea. "I think I should like to talk. I have been thinking--about that Indian that you want commemorated in bronze up there on the bluff. Do you think he was cruel?"
"Who knows? He was, perhaps, a savage. Yet he may have been tender-hearted. I hope so, if he is going to be fixed in bronze for the ages to stare at."
"Did you," Becky asked, deliberately, "ever want to tie a man to a stake and build a fire under him?"
He turned and stared at her. "My dear child, what ever put such an idea in your head?"
"Well, did you?"
He considered it. "There was a time in France when I wanted to do worse than that."
"But that was war."
"No, it was a brute in my own company. He broke the heart of a little girl that he met in Brittany. He--he--well he murdered her--dreams.
"Perhaps he didn't know what he was doing."
"He knew. Every man knows."
"And you wanted to make him--suffer----"
"Yes."
She shivered. "Are all men like that?"
"Like what?"
"Cruel."
"It can't be cruelty. It's a sense of justice."
"I hope it is." She kept thinking about George rising dank and dripping from the fountain. She hated to think about it.
So she changed the subject. "I thought you were painting."
"I was. But the moor is fickle. Yesterday she billowed towards the south, all gray and blue. And last night the storm spoiled it; she is gorgeous and gay to-day, and I don't like her."
"Oh, why not?"
"She is too obvious. Anybody can paint a Persian carpet, but one can't put soul into a--carpet----"
He was petulant. "I shall never paint the pictures I want to paint.
Life is too short."
"Life isn't short. Look at Grandfather. You will have forty years yet in which to paint."
And now it was he who changed the subject, quickly, as if he were afraid of it.
"My sister is coming to-morrow. I rather think you will like her."
"Will she like me, that's more important."
"She will love you, as I do, as everybody does, Becky."
They had reached that point in ten days that he could say such things to her and win her smile. She did not believe in the least that he loved her. He always laughed when he said it.
She liked him very much. She felt that the Admiral and Tristram and Archibald Cope were all of them the best of comrades. Except for Jane, she had had practically no feminine society since she came. And Jane was not especially inspiring, not like Tristram, who seemed to carry one's imagination back to Viking days.
Cope was immensely enthusiastic about Tristram. "If I could paint figures as I want to," he said, "I'd do Tristram as 'The Islander.'
One feels that he belongs here as inevitably as the moors or the sands or the sea. Perhaps it is he who ought to be in bronze on the bluff, instead of the Indian."
"But he'd have to face the sea," said Becky.
"Yes," Cope agreed, "he would. He loves it and his ancestors lived by it. I'll stick to my Indian and the moor."
Becky gathered up her letters. "It is time for lunch, and Jane doesn't like to be kept waiting. Won't you lunch with us? Grandfather will be delighted."
"I shall get to be a perpetual guest. I feel as if I were taking advantage of your hospitality."
"We shouldn't ask you if we didn't want you."
"Then I'll come."
They walked up the beach together. Becky was muffled in her red cape, Cope had a sweater under his coat. The air was sharp and clear as crystal.
"How anybody can go in bathing in this weather," Becky shivered, as a woman ran down the sands towards the sea. She east off her bathing cloak and stood revealed, slim and rather startling, in yellow.
"She goes in every day," said Cope, "even when it storms."
"Who is she?"
"A dancer--from New York. Haven't you seen her before?"
"No. Where is she staying?"
"At the hotel."
"I thought the hotel was closed."
"Not for three weeks. There aren't many guests. This one came up a month ago. She dances on the moor--practising for some play which opens in October."
"What's her name?"
"I don't know. They call her 'The Yellow Daffodil' because of that bathing suit."
The girl was swimming now beyond the breakers.
Becky was envious. "I wish I could swim like that."
"You can do other things--that she can't do."
"What things?"
"Well, be a lady, for example. That's not exactly cricket, is it, to draw a deadly parallel? But I don't want people like that dancing on my moor."
CHAPTER XIV THE DANCER ON THE MOOR I Randy's letter had set Becky adrift. She was not in love with him.
She was sure of that. And he had said he would not marry her without love. He had said that if she owned her soul she would think of Dalton as a cad and as a coward.
It seemed queer that Randy should be demanding things of her. He had always been so glad to take anything she would give, and now she had offered him herself, and he wouldn't have her. Not till she owned her soul.
She knew what he meant. The thought of George was always with her.
She kept seeing him as she had first seen him at the station; as he had been that wonderful day when they had had tea in the Pavilion; the night in the music room when he had hissed her; the old garden with its pale statues and box hedges; and always there was his sparkling glance, his quick voice.
She would never own her soul until she forgot George. Until she put him out of her life; until the thought of him would not make her burn hot with humiliation; until the thought of him would not thrill to her finger-tips.
She found Cope's easy and humorous companionship a balance for her hidden emotions. And when Louise Cope came, she proved to be a rather highly emphasized counterpart of her brother. Her red-gold hair was thick and she wore it bobbed. Her skin was white but lacked the look of delicacy which seemed to contradict constantly Cope's vivid personality. She seemed to laugh at the world as he did. She called Becky "quaint," but took to her at once.
"Archie has been writing to me of you," she told Becky; "he says you came up like a bird from the south."
"Birds don't fly north in the fall----"
"Well, you were the--miracle," Cope asserted.
Louise Cope's shrewd glance studied him. "He has fallen in love with you, Becky Bannister," was her blunt assurance, "but you needn't let it worry you. As yet it is only an aesthetic passion. But there is no telling what may come of it----"
"Does he fall in love--like that?" Becky demanded.
"He has never been in love," Louise declared, "not really. Except with me."
Becky felt that the Copes were a charming pair. When she answered Randy's letter she spoke of them.
"Louise adores her brother, and she thinks he would be a great artist if he would take himself seriously. But neither of them seems to take anything seriously. They always seem to be laughing at the world in a quiet way. Louise is not pretty, but she gives an effect of beauty---- She wears a big gray cape and a black velvet tam, and I am not sure that the color in her cheeks is real. She is different from other people, but it doesn't seem to be a pose. It is just because she has lived in so many places and has seen so many people and has thought for herself. I have always let other people think for me, haven't I, Randy?
"And now that I have done with the Copes, I am going to talk about the things that you said to me in your letter, and which are really the important things.
"I hated to think that you dropped Mr. Dalton in the fountain. I hated to think that you wanted to burn him at the stake--there was something--cruel--and--dreadful in it all. I have kept thinking of that struggle between you--in the dark---- I have hated to think that a few years ago if you had felt as you do about him--that you might have--killed him. But perhaps men are like that. They care more for justice than for--mercy.
"I am trying to take your advice and tell myself the truth about Mr.
Dalton. That he isn't worth a thought of mine. Yet I think of him a great deal. I am being very frank with you, Randy, because we have always talked things out. I think of him, and wonder which is the real man--the one I thought he was--and I thought him very fine and splendid. Or is he just trifling and commonplace? Perhaps he is just between, not as wonderful as I thought him, nor as contemptible as I seem forced to believe.
"Yet I gave him something that it is hard to take back. I gave a great deal. You see I had always been shut up in a glass case like the bob-whites and the sandpipers in the Bird Room, and I knew nothing of the world. And the first time I tried my wings, I thought I was flying towards the sun, and it was just a blaze that--burned me.
"Of course you are right when you say that you won't marry me unless I love you. I had a queer feeling at first about it--as if you were very far away and I couldn't reach you. But I know that you are right, and that you are thinking of the thing that is best for me. But I know I shall always have you as a friend. I don't think that I shall ever love anybody. And after this we won't talk about it. There are so many other things that we have to say to each other that don't hurt----"
Becky could not, of course, know the effect of her letter on Randy.
The night after its receipt, he roamed the woods. She had thought him cruel--and dreadful. Well, let her think it. He was glad that he had dropped George in the fountain. He should always be glad. But women were not like that--they were tender--and hated--hardness. Perhaps that was because they were--mothers---- And men were--hard. He had been hard, perhaps, in the things he had said in his letter. Her words rang in his ears. "I had a queer feeling at first that you were very far away, and that I could not reach you." And she had said that, when his soul ached to have her near.
Yet he had tried to do the best that he could for Becky. He had felt that she must not be bound by a tie that was no longer needed to protect her from Dalton. She was safe at 'Sconset, with the Admiral and her new friends the Copes. He envied them their hours with her.
He was desperately lonely, with a loneliness which had no hope.
He worked intensively. The boarders had gone from King's Crest, and he and the Major had moved into the big house. Randy spent a good deal of time in the Judge's library at Huntersfield. He and Truxton had great plans for their future. They read law, sold cars, and talked of their partnership. The firm was to be "Bannister, Paine and Beaufort"; it was to have brains, conscience, and business acumen.
"In the order named," Truxton told the Major. "The Judge has brains, Randy has a conscience. There's nothing left for me but to put pep into the business end of it."
Randy worked, too, on his little story. He did not know in the least what he was going to do with it, but it was an outlet for the questions which he kept asking himself. The war was over and the men who had fought had ceased to be important. He and the Major and Truxton talked a great deal about it. The Major took the high stand of each man's satisfaction in the thing he had done. Truxton was light-heartedly indifferent. He had his Mary, and his future was before him. But Randy argued that the world ought not to forget. "It was a rather wonderful thing for America. I want her to keep on being wonderful."
The Major in his heart knew that the boy was right. America must keep on being wonderful. Her young men must go high-hearted to the tasks of peace. It was the high-heartedness of people which had won the war.
It would be the high-heartedness of men and women which would bring sanity and serenity to a troubled world.
"The difficulty lies in the fact that we are always trying to make laws to right the world, when what we need is to form individual ideals.
The boy who says in his heart, 'I want to be like Lincoln,' and who stands in front of a statue of Lincoln, and learns from that rugged countenance the lesson of simple courage and honesty, has a better chance of a future than the boy who is told, 'There is evil in the world, and the law punishes those who transgress.' Half of our Bolsheviks would be tamed if they had the knowledge and love of some simple hero in their hearts, and felt that there was a chance for them to be heroic. The war gave them a chance. We have now to show them that there is beauty and heroism in orderly living----"
He was talking to Madge. She was still with the Flippins. The injury to her foot had been more serious than it had seemed. She might have gone with Oscar and Flora when they left Hamilton Hill. But she preferred to stay. Flora was to go to a hospital; Madge would not be needed.
"I am going to stay here as long as you will let me," she said to Mrs.
Flippin; "you will tell me if I am in the way----"
Mrs. Flippin adored Madge. "It is like having a Princess in the house," she said, "only she don't act like a Princess."
The Major came over every afternoon. Kemp drove him, as a rule, in the King's Crest surrey. If the little man missed Dalton's cars, he said no word. He made the Major very comfortable. He lived a life of ease if not of elegance, and he loved the wooded hills, the golden air, the fine old houses, the serene autumn glory of this southern world.
On the afternoon when the Major talked to Madge of the world at peace, they were together under the apple tree which Madge had first seen from the window of the east room. There were other apple trees in the old orchard, but it was this tree that Madge liked because of its golden globes. "The red ones are wonderful," she said, "but red isn't my color. With my gold skin, they make me look like a gypsy. If I am to be a golden girl, I must stay away from red----"
"Is that what you are--a golden girl?"
"That was always George Dalton's name for me."
"I am sorry."
"Why?"
"Because I should like it to be mine for you. I should like to link my golden West with the thought of you."
"And you won't now, because it was somebody else's name for me?"
Kemp, before he went away, had made her comfortable with cushions in a chair-like crotch of the old tree. The Major was at her feet. He meditated a moment. "I shall make it my name for you. What do I care what other men have called you."
"Do you know what you called me--once?" she was smiling down at him.
"No."
"A little lame duck. It was when I first tried to use my foot. And you laughed, and said that it--linked us--together. And now you are trying to link me with your West----"
"You know why, of course."
"Yes, I do."
He drew a long breath. "Most women would, have said, 'No, I don't know.' But you told the truth. I want to link you with my life in every way I can because I love you. And you know that I care--very much--that I want you for my wife--my golden girl in my golden West----?"
"You have never told me before that--you cared."
"There was no need to tell it. You knew."
"Yes. I was afraid it was true----"
He was startled. "Afraid? Why?"
"Oh, I oughtn't to let you care," she said. "You don't know what a slacker I've been. And I don't want you to find out----"
"The only thing that I want to find out is whether you care for me."
She flushed a little under his steady gaze, then quite unexpectedly she reached her hand down to him. He took it in his firm clasp. "I do care--an awful lot," she said, "but I've tried not to. And I shouldn't let you care for me."
"Why--shouldn't?"
"I'm not--half good enough. My life has always been lived at loose ends. Nothing bad, but a thousand things that you wouldn't--like to hear--I'm not a golden girl--I'm a gilded one----"
"Why should you tell me things like that? I don't believe it."
"Please believe it," she said earnestly, "don't whitewash things. Just let me begin again--loving you----"
Her voice broke. He drew himself up, and took her in his arms. "My dear girl," he said, "my dear girl----"
"I never met a man like you, I never believed there were--such men----"
He felt her tears against his hand.
"Listen," he said quietly; "let me tell you something of my life." He told her the things he had told Randy. Of the little wife he had not loved. "Perhaps if it had not been for her, I should not have had the courage to offer to you my--maimed--self. When I married her I was strong and young and had wealth to give her. Yet I did not give her love. And love is more than all the rest. I have that to give you--you know it."
"Yes."
"I have some money. I don't think it is going to count much with either of us. What will count is the way we plan our future. I have a big old ranch, and we'll live in it--with the dairy and the wide kitchen that you've talked about--and you won't have to wait for another world, dearest, to get your heart's desire----"
"I have my heart's desire," she whispered; "you are--my world."
II Madge wrote to George Dalton that she was going to marry Major Prime.
"There is no reason why we should put it off; Georgie. The clergyman who prayed for Flora will perform the ceremony, and the wedding will be at the Flippins' farm.
"It seems, of course, too good to be true. Not many women have such luck. Not my kind of women anyway. We meet men as a rule who want us to be gilded girls, and not golden ones. But Mark wants me to be gold all through. And I shall try to be---- We are to live on his ranch, a place that passes in California for a farm--a sort of glorified country place. Mrs. Flippin is teaching me to make butter, so that I can superintend my own dairy, and I have learned a great deal about chickens and eggs.
"I am going to be a housewife in what I call a reincarnated sense--loving my house and the things which belong to it, and living as a part of it, not above it, and looking down upon it. Perhaps all American women will come to that some day and I shall simply be blazing the way for them. I shall probably grow rosy and round, and if you ever ride up to my door-step, yon will find me a buxom and blooming matron instead of a golden girl. And you won't like it in the least.
But my husband will like it, because he thinks a bit as I do about it, and he doesn't care for the woman who lives for her looks.
"I shall come and see Flora before I go West. But I am going to be married first. We both have a feeling that it must be now--that something might happen if we put it off, and nothing must happen. I love him too much. Of course you won't believe that. I can hardly believe it myself. But I have someone to climb the heights with me, Georgie, and we shall ascend to the peak--together."
For a wedding present George sent Madge the pendant he had bought for Becky. To connect it up with Madge's favorite color scheme, he had an amethyst put in place of the sapphire. He was glad to give it away.
Every time he had come upon it, it had reminded him of things that he wished to forget.
Yet he could not forget. Even as Becky had thought of him, he had thought of her; of her radiant youth on the morning that Randy had arrived; at the Horse Show in her shabby shoes and sailor hat; in the Bird Room in pale blue under the swinging lamp; in the music room between tall candles; in the garden, with a star shining into the still pool; that last night, on the balcony, leaning over, with a yellow lantern like a halo behind her.
There were other things that he thought of--of Randy, in khaki on the station platform; Randy, lean and tall among the boarders; Randy, left behind with Kemp in the rain; Randy, debonair and insolent, announcing his engagement on the terrace at Hamilton Hill; Randy, a shadow against a silver sky, answering Becky's call; Randy, in the dark by the fountain, with muscles like iron, forcing him inevitably back, lifting him above the basin, letting him drop----; Randy, the Conqueror, marching away with Becky's fan as his trophy----!
New York was, of course, at this season of the year, a pageant of sparkling crowds, and of brilliant window displays, of new productions at the theaters. People were coming back to town. Even the fashionable folk were running down to taste the elixir of the early days in the metropolis.
But George found everything flat and stale. He did the things he had always done, hunted up the friends he had always known. He spent weekends at various country places, and came always back to town with an undiminished sense of his need of Becky, and his need of revenge on Randy.
He had heard before he left Virginia that Becky was at Nantucket. He had found some consolation in the fact that she was not at Huntersfield. To have thought of her with Randy in the old garden, on Pavilion Hill, in the Bird Room, would have been unbearable.
He had a feeling that, in a sense, Madge's marriage was a desertion.
He did not in the least want to marry her, but there were moments when he needed her friendship very much. He needed it now. And she was going to marry Major Prime, and go out to some God-forsaken place, and get fat and lose her beauty. He wished that she would not talk about such things--it made him feel old, and worried about his waist-line.
Even Oscar was failing him. "When Flora gets well," the little man kept telling him, "we are going to do some good with our money. We have done nothing but think of ourselves----"
"Oh, for Heaven's sake, don't preach," George exploded. It seemed to him that the world had gone mad on the subject of reforms. Man was no longer master of his fate. The time would come when the world would be a dry desert, without a cocktail or a highball for a thirsty soul, and all because a lot of people had been feeling for some time as Flora and Oscar felt at this moment.
"I shall take Flora up to the Crossing in a few days," Oscar was saying; "the doctor thinks the sea air will do her good. I wish you would come with us."
George had no idea of going with Oscar and Flora. He had been marooned long enough with a sick woman and her depressed spouse. When Flora was better and she and Oscar got over their mood of piety and repentance, he would be glad to join them. In the meantime he searched his mind for some reasonable excuse.
"Look here," he said, "I'll join you later, Oscar. I've promised some friends at Nantucket that I'll come down for the hunting."
"I didn't know that you had friends in Nantucket," Oscar told him moodily.
"The Merediths," George remembered in the nick of time the name of Becky's grandfather. Oscar would not know the difference.
Having committed himself, his spirits soared. It had, he felt, been an inspiration to put it over on Oscar like that. Subconsciously he had known that some day he would follow Becky, and when the moment came, he had spoken out of his thoughts.
In the two or three days that elapsed between his decision and the date that he had set for his departure, he found himself enjoying the city---its clear skies, its hurrying crowds, its color and glow, the tingle of its rush and hurry, its light-hearted acceptance of the pleasure of the moment.
He telegraphed for a room at a hotel in Nantucket. Once there, he was confident that he could find Becky. Everybody would know Admiral Meredith.
He went by boat from New York to New Bedford, and enjoyed the trip.
Later on the little steamer, _Sankaty_, plying between New Bedford and Nantucket, he was so shining and splendid that he was much observed by the other passengers. His Jap servant, trotting after him, was perhaps less martial in bearing than the ubiquitous Kemp, but he was none the less an ornament.
Thus George came, at last, to Nantucket, and to his hotel. Having dined, he asked the way to the Admiral's house. He did not of course plan to storm the citadel after dark, but a walk would not hurt him, and he could view from the outside the cage which held his white dove.
For he had come to that, sentimentally, that Becky was the white dove that he would shelter against his heart.
The clerk at the hotel desk, directing him, thought that the Admiral was not in his house on Main Street. He was apt at this season to spend his time in Siasconset.
"'Sconset? Where's 'Sconset?"
"Across the island."
"How can I get there?"
"You can motor over. There's a 'bus, or you can get a car."
So the next morning, George took the 'bus. He saw little beauty in the moor. He thought it low and flat. His heart leaped with the thought that every mile brought him nearer Becky--his white dove--whom he had--hurt!
He was set down by the 'bus at the post-office. He asked his way, and was directed to a low huddle of gray houses on a grassy street. "It is the 'Whistling Sally,'" the driver of the 'bus had told him.
When George reached "The Whistling Sally," he felt that there must be some mistake. Here was no proper home for an Admiral or an heiress.
His eyes were blind to the charms of the wooden young woman with the puffed-out cheeks, to the beauty of silver-gray shingles, of late flowers blooming bravely in the little garden.
He kept well on the other side of the street. It might perhaps be embarrassing if he met Becky while she was with her grandfather. He wanted to see her alone. With no one to interfere, he would be, he was sure, master of the situation.
He passed the house. The windows were open, and the white curtains blew out. But there was no one in sight. At the next corner, he accosted a tall man in work clothes, with bronzed skin and fair hair.
"Can you tell me," George asked, "whether Admiral Meredith lives in that cottage--'The Whistling Sally'?"
"Yes. But he isn't there. He's gone to Boston."
George was conscious of a sense of shock.
"Boston?"
"Yes. He wasn't very well and he wanted to see his doctor."
"Has his--granddaughter gone with him?"
"Miss Becky? Yes."
"But--the windows of the house are open----"
"I open them every morning. The housekeeper is in Nantucket. But they are all coming back at the end of the week."
"Coming back?" eagerly; "the Admiral, and Miss Bannister?"
"Yes."
George drew a long breath. He walked back with Tristram to the low gray house. "Queer little place," he said.
Tristram eyed him with easy tolerance. "Of course it seems queer if you aren't used to it----"
"I thought the Admiral had money."
"Well, he has. But he forgets it out here----"
"Is there a good hotel?"
"Yes. It is usually closed by now. But they are keeping it open for some guests who are up for the hunting."
The hotel was a pleasant rambling structure, and overlooked the sea.
George engaged a room for Saturday--and said that his man would bring his bags. He would have his lunch and take the afternoon 'bus back to Nantucket.
As he waited for the dining-room doors to open, a girl wrapped in a yellow cape crossed the porch and descended the steps which led to the beach. She wore a yellow bathing cap and yellow shoes. George walked to the top of the bluff and watched her. She threw off the cape, and stood slim end striking for a moment before she dived into the sea.
She swam splendidly. It was very cold, and George wondered how she endured it. When she came running back up the steps and across the porch, she was wrapped in the cape. She was rather handsome in a queer dark way. "It was cold," she said, as she passed George.
He took a step forward. "You were brave----"
She stopped and shrugged her shoulders. "One gets warm," she said, "in a moment."
She left him, and he went in to lunch. He stopped at the desk on the way out. "I have changed my mind. My man will bring my bags to-morrow."
It was still too early for the 'bus, so George walked back up the bluff, turning at last towards the left. Crossing a grassy space, there was ahead of him a ridge which marked the edge of the moor. A little fog was blowing in, and mistily through the fog he saw a figure which moved as light as smoke above the eminence. It was a woman dancing.
As he came nearer, he saw that she wore gray with a yellow sash. Her yellow cape lay on the ground. "I am not sure," George said, as he stopped beside her, "whether you are a pixie or a mermaid."
"Look," she said, smiling, "I'll show you what I am----"
She began with a light swaying motion, like a leaf stirred by a breeze.
Then, whipped into action, she ran before the pursuing elements. She cowered, and registered defiance. Her loosened hair hung heavy about her shoulders, then wound itself about her, as she whirled in a cyclone of movement. Beaten to the ground, she rose languidly, swayed again to that light step and stopped.
Then she came close to George. "You see," she said, "I am not a pixie or a mermaid. I am the spirit of the storm."
CHAPTER XV THE TRUMPETER SWAN I The Admiral's rheumatism had taken Becky to Boston. "There'll be treatments every morning," he said, "and we'll invite the Copes to visit us, and they will look after you while I am away."
The Copes were delighted. "Only it seems like an imposition----"
"The house is big enough for an army," the Admiral told them; "that's what we built houses for in the old days. To have our friends.
Charles, my butler, and his wife, Miriam, who cooks, stay in the house the year round, so it is always open and ready."
"And you and I shall see Boston together," Archibald told Becky, triumphantly. "I wonder if you have ever seen Boston as I shall show it to you."
"Well, I've been to all the historic places."
"Bunker Hill and the embattled farmers, of course," said Archibald;
"but have you seen them since the war?"
"No. Are they different?"
"They aren't, but you are. All of us are."
Louise was not quite sure that her brother ought to leave the island.
"You are down here for the air, Arch, and the quiet."
He was impatient. "Do you think I am going to miss this?"
She frowned and shook her head. "I don't want you to miss it. But it will be going against the doctor's orders."
"Oh, hang the doctor, Louise. Being in Boston with Becky will be like--wine----"
But she was not satisfied. "You always throw yourself into things so--desperately----"
"Well, when I lose my enthusiasm I want to--die."
"No, you don't, Arch. Don't say things like that." Her voice was sharp.
He patted her hand. "I won't. But don't curb me too much, old girl.
Let me play--while I can----"
They arrived in Boston to find a city under martial law, a city whose streets were patrolled by khaki-clad figures with guns, whose traffic was regulated by soldierly semaphores, who linked intelligence with military training, and picturesqueness with both.
For a short season Boston had been in the hands of the mob. All of her traditions of law and order had not saved her. It had been her punishment perhaps for leaving law and order in the hands of those who cared nothing for them. People with consciences had preferred to keep out of politics. So for a time demagogues had gotten the ear of the people, and chaos had resulted until a quiet governor had proved himself as firm as steel, and soldiers had replaced the policemen who had for a moment followed false gods.
"It all proves what I brought you here to see," Cope told Becky eagerly.
Coffee was being served in the library of the Meredith mansion on Beacon Street. The Admiral's library was as ruddy and twinkling as the little man himself. He had furnished it to suit his own taste. A great davenport of puffy red velvet was set squarely in front of a fireplace with shining brasses. The couch was balanced by a heavy gilt chair also in puffy red. The mantel was in white marble, and over the mantel was an oil portrait of the Admiral's wife painted in '76. She wore red velvet with a train, and with the pearls which had come down to Becky. The room had been keyed up to her portrait, and had then been toned down with certain heavy pieces of ebony, a cabinet of black lacquer, the dark books which lined the wall to the ceiling. The room was distinctly nineteenth-century. If it lacked the eighteenth-century exquisiteness of the house at Nantucket, with its reminder of austere Quaker prejudices, it was none the less appropriate as a glowing background for the gay old Admiral.
Becky and Cope sat on the red davenport. It was so wide that Becky was almost lost in a corner of it. The old butler, Charles, served the coffee. The coffee service was of repousse silver. The Admiral would have no other. It had been given him by a body of seamen when he had retired from active duty.
"It all proves what I brought you here to see," Archibald emphasized, "how the gods of yesterday are going to balance the gods of to-day."
The Admiral chuckled. "There aren't any gods of to-day."
"The gods of to-day are our young men," Cope flung out, glowingly; "the war has left them with their dreams, and they have got to find a way to make their dreams come true. And that's where the old gods will help.
Those fine old men who dreamed, backed their dreams with deeds. Then for a time we were so busy making money that we forgot their dreams.
And when foreigners came crowding to our shores, we didn't care whether they were good Americans or not. All we cared was to have them work in our mills and factories and in our kitchens, and let us alone in our pride of ancestry and pomp of circumstance. We forgot to show them Bunker Hill and to tell them about the old North Church and Paul Revere and the shot heard 'round the world, and what liberty meant and democracy, and now we've got to show them. I am going to take you around to-morrow, Becky, and pretend you are Olga from Petrograd, and that you are seeing America for the first time."
Archibald Cope was kindled by fires which gave color to his pale cheeks. "Will you be--Olga from Petrograd?"
"I'd love it."
But the next morning it rained. "And you can't, of course, be Olga of Petrograd in the rain. Bunker Hill must have the sun on it, and the waves of the harbor must be sparkling when I tell you about the tea."
They decided, therefore, to read aloud "The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table."
"Then if it stops raining," said Archibald, "we'll step straight out from its pages into the Boston that I want to show you."
He read well. Louise sat at a little table sewing a pattern of beads on a green bag. Becky had some rose-colored knitting. The Admiral was in his big chair by the fire with his hands folded across his waistcoat and his eyes shut. The colorful work of the two women, the light of the fire, the glow of the little lamp at Cope's elbow, the warmth of the red furniture saved the room from dreariness in spite of the rain outside.
"'It was on the Common,'" read Cope, "'that we were walking. The mall, or boulevard of our Common, you know, has various branches leading from it in different directions. One of these runs down from opposite Joy Street southward across the whole length of the Common to Boylston Street. We called it the long path, and were fond of it.
"'I felt very weak indeed (though of a tolerably robust habit) as we came opposite the head of this path on that morning. I think I tried to speak twice without making myself distinctly audible. At last I got out the question, "Will you take the long path with me?" "Certainly,"
said the school-mistress, "with much pleasure." "Think," I said, "before you answer: if you take the long path with me now, I shall interpret it that we are to part no more!" The schoolmistress stepped back with a sudden movement, as if an arrow had struck her.
"'One of the long granite blocks used as seats was hard by--the one you may still see close by the Gingko-tree. "Pray sit down," I said. "No, no," she answered, softly, "I will walk the _long path_ with you!"
"'--The old gentleman who sits opposite met us walking arm in arm about the middle of the long path, and said, very charmingly,--"Good-morning, my dears!"'"
The reading stopped at luncheon time, and it was still raining. On the table were letters for Becky forwarded from Siasconset. An interesting account from Aunt Claudia of the wedding of Major Prime and Madge MacVeigh.
"They were married in the old orchard at the Flippins', and it was beautiful. The bride wore simple clothes like the rest of us. It was cool and we kept on our wraps, and she was in white linen with a loose little coat of mauve wool, and a hat to match. The only bride-y thing about her was a great bunch of lilacs that the Major ordered from a Fifth Avenue florist. They are to stay in New York for a day or two, and then visit the Watermans on the North Shore. After that they will go at once to the West, where they are to live on the Major's ranch.
He has been relieved from duty at Washington, and will have all of his time to give to his own affairs.
"There has been an epidemic of weddings. Flippins' Daisy waited just long enough to help Mrs. Flippin get Miss MacVeigh married; then she and young John had an imposing ceremony in their church, with Daisy in a train and white veil, and four bridesmaids, and Mandy and Calvin in front seats, and Calvin giving the bride away. I think the elaborateness of it all really reconciled Mandy to her daughter-in-law."
There was also, from Randy, a long envelope enclosing a thick manuscript and very short note.
"I want you to read this, Becky. It belongs in a way to you. I don't know what I think about it. Sometimes it seems as if I had done a rather big thing, and as if it had been done without me at all. I wonder if you understand what I mean--as if I had held the pen, and it had--come---- I have sent it to the editor of one of the big magazines. Perhaps he will send it back, and it may not seem as good to me as it does at this moment. Let me know what you think."
Becky, finishing the letter, felt a bit forlorn. Randy, as a rule, wrote at length about herself and her affairs. But, of course, he had other things now to think of. She must not expect too much.
There was no time, however, in which to read the manuscript, for Cope was saying, wistfully, "Do you think you'd mind a walk in the rain?"
"No." She gathered up her letters.
"Then we'll walk across the Common."
They shared one umbrella. And they played that it was over fifty years ago when the Autocrat had walked with the young Schoolmistress. They even walked arm in arm under the umbrella. They took the long path to Boylston Street. And Cope said, "Will you take the long path with me?"
And Becky said, "Certainly."
And they both laughed. But there was no laughter in Cope's heart.
"Becky," he said, "I wish that you and I had lived a century ago in Louisburg Square."
"If we had lived then, we shouldn't be living now."
"But we should have had our--happiness----"
"And I should have worn lovely flowing silk skirts. Not short things like this, and little bonnets with flowers inside, and velvet mantles----"
"And you would have walked on my arm to church. And we would have owned one of those old big houses--and your smile would have greeted me across the candles every day at dinner----" He was making it rather personal, but she humored his fancy.
"And you would have worn a blue coat, and a bunch of big seals, and a furry high hat----"
"You are thinking all the time about what we would wear," he complained; "you haven't any sense of romance, Becky----"
"Well, of course, it is all make-believe."
"Yes, it is all--make-believe," he said, and walked in silence after that.
The wind blew cold and they stopped in a pastry shop on Boylston Street and had a cup of tea. Becky ate little cream cakes with fluted crusts, and drank Orange Pekoe.
"I am glad you don't wear flowing silks and velvet mantles," said Archibald, suddenly; "I shall always remember you like this, Becky, in your rough brown coat and your close little hat, and that your hand was on my arm when we walked across the Common. Do you like me as a playmate, Becky?"
"Yes."
"Do you--love me--as a playmate?" He leaned forward.
"Please--don't."
"I beg your--pardon----" he flushed. "I am not going to say such things to you, Becky, and spoil things for both of us--I know you don't want to hear them----"
"Make-believe is much nicer," she reminded him steadily.
"But I am not a make-believe friend, am I? Our friendship--that at least is--real?"
Her clear eyes met his. "Yes. We shall always be friends--forever----"
"How long is forever, Becky?"
She could not answer that. But she was sure that friendship was like love and lived beyond the grave. They were very serious about it, these two young people drinking tea.
II It was when the four of them were gathered together that night in the library that Becky asked Archibald Cope to read "The Trumpeter Swan."
"Randy wrote it," she said, "and he sent the manuscript to me this morning."
The Admiral was at once interested. "He got the name from the swan in the Judge's Bird Room?"
"Yes."
"Has he ever written anything before?" Louise asked.
"Lots of little things. Lovely things----"
"Have they been published?"
"I don't think he has tried."
Becky had the manuscript in her work-bag. She brought it out and handed it to Archibald. "You are sure you aren't too tired?"
Louise glanced up from her beaded bag. "You've had a hard day, Arch.
You mustn't do too much."
"I won't, Louise," impatiently.
She went back to her work. "It will be on your own head if you don't sleep to-night, not on mine."
"The Trumpeter Swan" was a story of many pages. Randy had confined himself to no conventional limits. He had a story to tell, and he did not bring it to an end until the end came naturally. In it he had asked all of the questions which had torn his soul. What of the men who had fought? What of their futures? What of their high courage?
Their high vision? Was it all now to be wasted? All of that aroused emotion? All of that disciplined endeavor? Would they still "carry on" in the spirit of that crusade, or would they sink back, and forget?
His hero was a simple lad. He had fought for his country. He had found when he came back that other men had made money while he fought for them. He loved a girl. And in his absence she had loved someone else. For a time he was over-thrown.
Yet he had been one of a glorious company. One of that great flock which had winged its exalted flight to France. Throughout the story Randy wove the theme of the big white bird in the glass case. His hero felt himself likewise on the shelf, shut-in, stuffed, dead--his trumpet silent.
"Am I, too, in a glass case?" he asked himself; "will my trumpet never sound again?"
The first part of the story ended there. "Jove," Cope said, as he looked up, "that boy can write----"
Louise had stopped working. "It is rather--tremendous, don't you think?"
Archibald nodded. "In a quiet way it thrills. He hasn't used a word too much. But he carries one with him to a sort of--upper sky----"
Becky, flushing and paling with the thought of such praise as this for Randy, said, "I always thought he could do it."
But even she had not known that Randy could do what he did in the second part of the story.
For in it Randy answered his own questions. There was no limit to a man's powers, no limits to his patriotism, if only he believed in himself. He must strive, of course, to achieve. But striving made him strong. His task might be simple, but its very simplicity demanded that he put his best into it. He must not measure himself by the rule of little men. If other men had made money while he fought, then let them be weighed down by their bags of gold. He would not for one moment set against their greed those sacred months of self-sacrifice.
And as for the woman he loved. If his love meant anything it must burn with a pure flame. What he might have been for her, he would be because of her. He would not be less a man because he had loved her.
And so the boy came in the end of the story to the knowledge that it was the brave souls who sounded their trumpets---- One did not strive for happiness. One strove for--victory. One strove, at least, for one clear note of courage, amid the clamor of the world.
Louise, listening, forgot her beads. The Admiral blew his nose and wiped his eyes. Becky felt herself engulfed by a wave of surging memories.
"That's corking stuff, do you know it?" Archibald was asking.
Louise asked, "How old is he?"
"Twenty-three."
"He is young to have learned all that----"
"All what, Louise?" Archibald asked.
"Renunciation," said Louise, slowly, "that's what it is in the final analysis," she went back to her beads and her green bag.
"Randy ought to do great things," said Becky; "the men of his family have all done great things, haven't they, Grandfather?"
"Randolph blood is Randolph blood," said the Admiral; "fine old Southerners; proud old stock."
"If I could write like that," said Archibald, and stopped and looked into the fire.
Louise rose and came and stood back of him. "You can paint," she said, "why should you want to write?"
"I can't paint," he reached up and caught her hand in his; "you think I can, but I can't. And I am not wonderful---- Yet here I must sit and listen while you and Becky sing young Paine's praises."
He flung out his complaint with his air of not being in earnest.
The Admiral got up stiffly. "I've a letter to write before I go to bed. Don't let me hurry the rest of you."
"Please take Louise with you," Archibald begged; "I want to talk to Becky."
His sister rumpled his hair. "So you want to get rid of me. Becky, he is going to ask questions about that boy who wrote the story."
"Are you?" Becky demanded.
"Louise is a mind reader. That's why I want her out of the way----"
"You can stay until the Admiral finishes his letter." Louise bent and kissed him, picked up her beaded bag, and left them together.
When she reached the threshold, she stopped and looked back. Archibald had piled up two red cushions and was sitting at Becky's feet.
"Tell me about him."
"Randy?"
"Yes. He's in love with you, of course."
"What makes you think that?"
"He sent you the story."
"Well, he is," she admitted, "but I am not sure that we ought to talk about it."
"Why not?"
"Is it quite fair, to him?"
"Then we'll talk about his story. It gripped me---- Oh, let's have it out, Becky. He loves you and you don't love him. Why don't you?"
"I can't---tell you----"
There was silence for a moment, then Archibald Cope said gently, "Look here, girl dear, you aren't happy. Don't I know it? There's something that's awfully on your mind and heart. Can't you think of me as a sort of--father confessor--and let me--help----?"
She clasped her hands tensely on her knees; the knuckles showed white.
"Nobody can help."
"Is it as bad as that?"
"Yes." She looked away from him. "There is somebody else--not Randy.
Somebody that I shouldn't think about. But I--do----"
She was dry-eyed. But he felt that here was something too deep for tears.
"Does Randy know?"
"Yes. I told him. We have always talked about things----"
"I see," he sat staring into the fire, "and of course it is Randy that you ought to marry----"
"I don't want to marry anyone. I shall never marry----"
"Tut-tut, my dear." He laid his hand over hers. "Do you know what I was thinking, Becky, to-day, as we walked the Boston streets? I was thinking of why those big houses were built, rows upon rows of them, and of the people who lived in them. Those old houses speak of homes, Becky, of people who wanted household gods, and neighborly gatherings, and community interests. They weren't the kind of people who ran around Europe with a paint box, as I have been doing. They had home-keeping hearts and they built for the future."
He was very much in earnest. She had, indeed, never seen him so much in earnest.
"It is all very well," he went on, "to talk of a tent in a desert or a hut on a mountain top, but when we walked across the Common this morning, it seemed to me that if I could really have lived the game we played--that life could have held nothing better in the world for me than that, my dear."
She tried to withdraw her hand, but he held it. "Let me speak to-night, Becky--and then forever, we'll forget it. I love you--very much. You don't love me, and I should thank the stars for that, although I am not sure that I do. I am not a man to deal in--futures.
I'll tell you why some day." He drew a long breath and went on in a lighter tone: "But you, Becky--you've got to find a man whose face you will want to see at the other end of the table--for life. It sounds like a prisoner's sentence, doesn't it?"
But he couldn't carry it off like that, and presently he hid his face against her hands. "Oh, Becky, Becky," she heard him whisper.
Then there was the Admiral's step in the hall and Archibald was on his feet, staring in the fire when the little man came in.
"Any letters for Charles to mail?"
"No, Grandfather."
The Admiral limped away. Becky stood up. Cope turned from the fire.
"If it doesn't rain to-morrow, I'll show America to Olga of Petrograd."
They smiled at each other, and Becky held out her hand. He bent and kissed it. "I shall sleep well to-night because of--to-morrow."
III But when to-morrow came there was a telephone message for Becky that Major Prime and his wife were in town. They had messages for her from Huntersfield, and from King's Crest.
"And so our day is spoiled," said Archibald.
"We can come again," said the Admiral, "but we must be getting back to Siasconset to-morrow. I wrote to Tristram. We'll have Prime and his wife here for dinner to-night, and drive them out somewhere this afternoon. I remember Mark Prime well. I played golf with him one season at Del Monte. How did you happen to know him, Becky?"
Becky told of the Major's sojourn to King's Crest.
The Copes made separate plans for the afternoon. "If I can't have you to myself, Becky," Cope complained, "I won't have you at all----"
Madge, sitting later next to Becky in the Admiral's big car, was lovely in a great cape of pale wisteria, with a turban of the same color set low on her burnt-gold hair.
"I have brought you wonderful news of Randy Paine," she said to Becky.
"He has sold his story, 'The Trumpeter Swan.' To one of the big magazines. And they have asked for more. He is by way of being rather--famous. He came on to New York the day after we arrived. They had telegraphed for him. We wanted him to come up here with us, but he wouldn't."
"Why wouldn't he?"
"He had some engagements, and after that----"
"He will never write another story like 'The Trumpeter Swan,'" said Becky.
"Why not?"
"It--it doesn't seem as if he could---- It is--wonderful, Mrs.
Prime----"
"Well, Randy--is wonderful," said Madge.
A silence fell between them, and when Madge spoke again it was of the Watermans. "We go to the Crossing to-morrow. I must see Flora before I go West."
The blood ran up into Becky's heart. She wondered if George Dalton was with the Watermans. But she did not dare ask.
So she asked about California instead. "You will live out there?"
"Yes, on a ranch. There will be chickens and cows and hogs. It sounds unromantic, doesn't it? But it is really frightfully interesting. It is what I have always dreamed about. Mark says this is to be my--reincarnation."
She laughed a little as she explained what she meant. "And when I was in New York, I bought the duckiest lilac linens and ginghams, and white aprons, frilly ones. Mark says I shall look like a dairy maid in 'Robin Hood.'"
The Major, who was in front of them with the Admiral, turned and spoke.
"Tell her about Kemp."
"Oh, he is going with us. It develops that there is a girl in Scotland who is waiting for him. And he is going to send for her--and they are to have a cottage on the ranch, and come into the house to help us, and there is an old Chinese cook that Mark has had for years."
Becky spoke sharply. "You don't mean Mr.--Dalton's Kemp?"
"Yes. He came to Mark. Didn't you know?"
Becky had not known.
"Why did he leave Mr.--Dalton?"
"He and Georgie had a falling out about an omelette. I fancy it was a sort of comic opera climax. So Mark got a treasure and Georgie-Porgie lost one----"
"Georgie-Porgie?"
"Oh, I always call him that, and he hates it," Madge laughed at the memory.
"You did it to--tease him?" slowly.
"I did it because it was--true. You know the old nursery rhyme? Well, George is like that. There were always so many girls to be--kissed, and it was so easy to--run away----"
She said it lightly, with shrugged shoulders, but she did not look at Becky.
And that night when she was dressing for dinner, Madge said to her husband, "It sounded--catty--Mark. But I had to do it. There's that darling boy down there eating his heart out. And she is nursing a dream----"
The Major was standing by his wife's door, and she was in front of her mirror. It reflected her gold brocade, her amethysts linked with diamonds in a long chain that ended in a jeweled locket. Her jewel case was open and she brought out the pendant that George had sent her and held it against her throat. "It matches the others," she said.
He arched his eyebrows in inquiry.
"I wouldn't wear it," she said with a sudden quick force, "if there was not another jewel in the world. I wish he hadn't sent it. Oh, Mark, I wish I hadn't known him before I found--you," she came up to him swiftly; "such men as you," she said, "if women could only meet them--_first_----"
His arm went around her. "It is enough that we--met----"
Becky was also at her mirror at that moment. She had dressed carefully in silver and white with her pearls and silver slippers. Louise came in and looked at her. "I haven't any grand and gorgeous things, you know. And I fancy your Mrs. Prime will be rather gorgeous."
"It suits her," said Becky, "but after this she is going to be different." She told Louise about the ranch and the linen frocks and the frilled aprons. "She is going to make herself over. I wonder if it will be a success."
"It doesn't fit in with my theories," said Louise. "I think it is much better if people marry each other ready-made."
Becky turned from her mirror. "Louise," she said, "does anything ever fit in with a woman's theories when she falls in love?"
"One shouldn't fall in love," Louise said, serenely, "they should walk squarely into it. That's what I shall do, when I get ready to marry---- But I shall love Archibald as long as the good Lord will let me----"
She was trying to say it lightly, but a quiver of her voice betrayed her.
"Louise," Becky said, "what's the matter with Archibald? Is anything really the matter?"
Louise began to cry. "Archie saw the doctor to-day, and he won't promise anything--I made Arch tell me----"
"Oh, Louise." Becky's lips were white.
"Of course if he takes good care of himself, it may not be for years.
You mustn't let him know that I told you, Becky. But I had to tell somebody. I've kept it all bottled up as if I were a stone image. And I'm not a stone image, and he's all I have."
She dabbed her eyes with a futile handkerchief. The tears dripped. "I must stop," she kept saying, "I shall look like a fright for dinner----"
But at dinner she showed no signs of her agitation. She had used powder and rouge with deft touches. She had followed Becky's example and wore white, a crisp organdie, with a high blue sash. With her bobbed hair and pink cheeks she was not unlike a painted doll. She carried a little blue fan with lacquered sticks, and she tapped the table as she talked to Major Prime. The tapping was the only sign of her inner agitation.
The Admiral's table that night seemed to Becky a circle of sinister meaning. There was Archibald condemned to die--while youth still beat in his veins---- There was Louise, who must go on without him. There was the Admiral--the last of a vanished company; there was the Major, whose life for four years had held--horrors. There was Madge, radiant to-night in the love of her husband, as she had perhaps once been radiant for Dalton.
_Georgie-Porgie_!
It was a horrid name. "_There were always so many girls to be kissed--and it was so easy to run away----_"
She had always hated the nursery rhyme. But now it seemed, to sing itself in her brain.
"_Georgie-Porgie, Pudding and pie, Kissed the girls, And made them cry----_"
Cope was at Becky's right. "Aren't you going to talk to me? You haven't said a word since the soup."
"Well, everybody else is talking."
"What do I care for anybody else?"
Becky wondered how Archibald did it. How he kept that light manner for a world which he was not long to know. And there was Louise with rouge and powder on her cheeks to cover her tears---- That was courage---- She thought suddenly of "The Trumpeter Swan."
She spoke out of her thoughts. "Randy has sold his story."
He wanted to know all about it, and she repeated what Madge had said.
Yet even as she talked, that hateful rhyme persisted, "_When the girls Came out to play, Georgie-Porgie Ran away----_"
After dinner they went into the drawing-room so that Louise could play for them. A great mirror which hung at the end of the room reflected Louise on the piano bench in her baby frock. It reflected Madge, slim and gold, with a huge fan of lilac feathers. It reflected Becky--in a rose-colored damask chair, it reflected the three men in black. Years ago there had been other men and women--the Admiral's wife in red velvet and the same pearls that were now on Becky's neck---- She shuddered.
As they drove home that night, the Major spoke to his wife of Becky.