The Project Gutenberg eBook of English and Scottish Ballads, Volume I This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
Title: English and Scottish Ballads, Volume I Editor: Francis James Child Release date: August 10, 2011 [eBook #37031] Most recently updated: January 8, 2021 Language: English Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/37031 Credits: Produced by Simon Gardner, Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of public domain works from the University of Michigan Digital Libraries.) *** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ENGLISH AND SCOTTISH BALLADS, VOLUME I *** Produced by Simon Gardner, Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of public domain works from the University of Michigan Digital Libraries.) Transcriber's Notes:
1. Greek text has been replaced by a transliteration and indicated by [Grk: ...]. In "Constantine and Arete" the same transliteration scheme has been used for modern Greek text as is customary for ancient Greek.
2. Footnotes have been relocated following the paragraph or section where the anchor occurs. Footnote anchors are in the form [A], [B] etc.
3. Linenotes have been grouped at the end of each ballad. Linenote anchors in the form [L##] have been added to the text (they are not in the original but alert the reader to the presence of a note referring to line number ##). Ballad line numbers have been regularised to multiples of five and re-positioned or added where necessary.
4. [z] has been used to represent the yogh character.
5. Italic typeface is represented by _underscores_.
6. Archaic, unusual and inconsistent spelling or punctuation has generally been retained as in the original. Where changes have been made to the text these are listed in Transcriber's Notes at the end of the book.
* * * * * ENGLISH AND SCOTTISH BALLADS.
EDITED BY FRANCIS JAMES CHILD.
Sum bethe of wer, and sum of wo, Sum of joie and mirthe also;
And sum of trecherie and of gile, Of old aventours that fel while;
And sum of bourdes and ribaudy;
And many ther beth of fairy;
Of all thinges that men seth;-- Maist o love forsothe thai beth.
_Lay le Freine._ VOLUME I.
BOSTON:
LITTLE, BROWN AND COMPANY.
M.DCCC.LX.
* * * * * Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1857, by LITTLE, BROWN AND COMPANY, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of Massachusetts.
RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY H.O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.
CONTENTS OF VOLUME FIRST.
Page PREFACE vii List of Collections of Ballads and Songs xiii BOOK I.
1. The Boy and the Mantle 3 2. The Horn of King Arthur 17 3. The Marriage of Sir Gawaine 28 4. King Arthur's Death 40 5. The Legend of King Arthur 50 6. Sir Lancelot du Lake 55 7. The Legend of Sir Guy 61 8. St. George and the Dragon 69 9. The Seven Champions of Christendom 83 10a. Thomas of Ersseldoune 95 10b. Thomas the Rhymer 109 11. The Young Tamlane 114 12. The Wee Wee Man 126 13. The Elfin Knight 128 14a. The Broomfield Hill 131 14b. Lord John 134 15a. Kempion 137 15b. Kemp Owyne 143 16. King Henry 147 17a. Cospatrick 152 17b. Bothwell 158 18. Willie's Ladye 162 19. Alison Gross 168 20. The Earl of Mar's Daughter 171 21a. Young Akin 179 21b. Young Hastings the Groom 189 22. Clerk Colvill, or, The Mermaid 192 23a. Lady Isabel and the Elf-Knight 195 23b. The Water O'Wearie's Well 198 24a. The Daemon Lover 201 24b. James Herries 205 25. The Knight's Ghost 210 26. The Wife of Usher's Well 213 27. The Suffolk Miracle 217 28. Sir Roland 223 APPENDIX.
Fragment of the Ballad of King Arthur and the King of Cornwall 231 Fragment of Child Rowland and Burd Ellen 245 Rosmer Hafmand, or, The Merman Rosmer 253 Tama-a-Line 258 Tom Linn 267 Burd Ellen and Young Tamlane 271 Als Y yod on ay Mounday 273 The Elphin Knight 277 The Laidley Worm of Spindlestonheugh 281 Lord Dingwall 288 Fragment of Hynde Etin 294 Sir Oluf and the Elf-King's Daughter 298 Fragment of the Daemon Lover 302 Constantine and Arete 304 Translation of the Same 307 The Hawthorn Tree 311 St. Stephen and Herod 315 GLOSSARY 319 PREFACE.
These volumes have been compiled from the numerous collections of Ballads printed since the beginning of the last century. They contain all but two or three of the _ancient_ ballads of England and Scotland, and nearly all those ballads which, in either country, have been gathered from oral tradition,--whether ancient or not. Widely different from the true popular ballads, the spontaneous products of nature, are the works of the professional ballad-maker, which make up the bulk of Garlands and Broadsides. These, though sometimes not without grace, more frequently not lacking in humor, belong to artificial literature,--of course to an humble department.[A] As many ballads of this second class have been admitted as it was thought might be wished for, perhaps I should say tolerated, by the "benevolent reader." No words could express the dulness and inutility of a collection which should embrace all the Roxburghe and Pepys broadsides--a scope with which this publication was most undeservedly credited by an English journal. But while the broadside ballads have been and must have been gleaned, the popular ballads demand much more liberal treatment. Many of the older ones are mutilated, many more are miserably corrupted, but as long as any traces of their originals are left, they are worthy of attention and have received it. When a ballad is extant in a variety of forms, all the most important versions are given.--Less than this would have seemed insufficient for a collection intended as a complement to an extensive series of the British Poets.
To meet the objections of readers for pleasure, all those pieces which are wanting in general interest are in each volume inserted in an appendix.
[A] This distinction is not absolute, for several of the ancient ballads have a sort of literary character, and many broadsides were printed from oral tradition. The only _popular_ ballads excluded from this selection that require mention, are _The Bonny Hynd_, _The Jolly Beggar_, _The Baffled Knight_, _The Keach in the Creel_, and _The Earl of Errol_. These ballads, in all their varieties, may be found by referring to the general Index at the end of the eighth volume. To extend the utility of this index, references are also given to many other ballads which, though not worth reprinting, may occasionally be inquired for.
The ballads are grouped in eight Books, nearly corresponding to the division of volumes. The arrangement in the several Books may be called chronological, by which is meant, an arrangement according to the probable antiquity of the story, not the age of the actual form or language. Exceptions to this rule will be observed, partly the result of oversight, partly of fluctuating views; the most noticeable case is in the First Book, where the ballads that stand at the beginning are certainly not so old as some that follow. Again, it is very possible that some pieces might with advantage be transferred to different Books, but it is believed that the general disposition will be found practically convenient. It is as follows:-- BOOK I. contains Ballads involving Superstitions of various kinds,--as of Fairies, Elves, Water-spirits, Enchantment, and Ghostly Apparitions; and also some Legends of Popular Heroes.
BOOK II. Tragic Love-ballads.
BOOK III. Other Tragic Ballads.
BOOK IV. Love-ballads not Tragic.
BOOK V. Ballads of Robin Hood, his followers, and compeers.
BOOK VI. Ballads of other Outlaws, especially Border Outlaws, of Border Forays, Feuds, &c.
BOOK VII. Historical Ballads, or those relating to public characters or events.
BOOK VIII. Miscellaneous Ballads, especially Humorous, Satirical, Burlesque; also some specimens of the Moral and Scriptural, and all such pieces as had been overlooked in arranging the earlier volumes.
For the Texts, the rule has been to select the most authentic copies, and to reprint them as they stand in the collections, restoring readings that had been changed without grounds, and noting all deviations from the originals, whether those of previous editors or of this edition, in the margin. Interpolations acknowledged by the editors have generally been dropped. In two instances only have previously printed texts been superseded or greatly improved: the text of _The Horn of King Arthur_, in the first volume, was furnished from the manuscript, by J.O. Halliwell, Esq., and _Adam Bel_, in the fifth volume, has been amended by a recently discovered fragment of an excellent edition, kindly communicated by J.P. Collier, Esq.
The Introductory Notices prefixed to the several ballads may seem dry and somewhat meagre. They will be found, it is believed, to comprise what is most essential even for the less cursory reader to know. These prefaces are intended to give an account of all the printed forms of each ballad, and references to the books in which they were first published. In many cases also, the corresponding ballads in other languages, especially in Danish, Swedish, and German, are briefly pointed out. But these last notices are very imperfect. Fascinating as such investigations are, they could not be allowed to interfere with the progress of the series of Poets of which this collection of Ballads forms a part, nor were the necessary books immediately at hand. At a more favorable time the whole subject may be resumed, unless some person better qualified shall take it up in the interim.
While upon this point let me make the warmest acknowledgments for the help received from Grundtvig's Ancient Popular Ballads of Denmark (_Danmarks Gamle Folkeviser_), a work which has no equal in its line, and which may in every way serve as a model for collections of National Ballads. Such a work as Grundtvig's can only be imitated by an English editor, never equalled, for the material is not at hand.
All Denmark seems to have combined to help on his labors;
schoolmasters and clergymen, in those retired nooks where tradition longest lingers, have been very active in taking down ballads from the mouths of the people, and a large number of old manuscripts have been placed at his disposal.--We have not even the Percy Manuscript at our command, and must be content to take the ballads as they are printed in the _Reliques_, with all the editor's changes. This manuscript is understood to be in the hands of a dealer who is keeping it from the public in order to enhance its value. The greatest service that can now be done to English Ballad-literature is to publish this precious document. Civilization has made too great strides in the island of Great Britain for us to expect much more from tradition.
Certain short romances which formerly stood in the First Book, have been dropped from this second Edition, in order to give the collection a homogeneous character. One or two ballads have been added, and some of the prefaces considerably enlarged.
F.J.C.
_May_, 1860.
LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL COLLECTIONS OF ENGLISH AND SCOTTISH BALLADS AND SONGS.
[This list does not include (excepting a few reprints) the collections of Songs, Madrigals, "Ballets," &c., published in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,--the titles of most of which are to be seen in Rimbault's _Bibliotheca Madrigaliana_. On the other hand, it does include a few useful books connected with ballad-poetry which would not properly come into a list of collections. The relative importance of the works in this list is partially indicated by difference of type. When two or more editions are mentioned, those used in this collection are distinguished by brackets. A few books which we have not succeeded in finding--all of slight or no importance--are marked with a star.] "A Choise Collection of Comic and Serious Scots Poems. Both Ancient and Modern. By several Hands. Edinburgh. Printed by James Watson."
Three Parts, 1706, 1709, 1710. [1713, 1709, 1711.] "Miscellany Poems, containing a variety of new Translations of the Ancient Poets, together with several original poems. By the most eminent hands." Ed. by Dryden. 6 vols. 1st ed. 1684-1708. Ed. of 1716* contains ballads not in the earlier ones.
"Wit and Mirth: or Pills to Purge Melancholy; being a Collection of the best Merry Ballads and Songs, Old and New. Fitted to all Humours, having each their proper Tune for either Voice or Instrument: most of the Songs being new set." By Thomas D'Urfey. 6 vols. London. 1719-20.
"A COLLECTION OF OLD BALLADS. Corrected from the best and most ancient Copies extant. With Introductions Historical, Critical, or Humorous."
3 vols. London. 1st and 2d vol. 1723, 3d vol. 1725.
"The Evergreen. Being a Collection of Scots Poems, Wrote by the Ingenious before 1600. Published by Allan Ramsay." 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1724. [Edinburgh. Printed for Alex. Donaldson, 1761.] "The Tea-Table Miscellany: A Collection of Choice Songs, Scots and English." Edinburgh. 1724. 4 vols. [Glasgow, R. & A. Foulis. 1768. 2 vols.] "Orpheus Caledonius, or a Collection of Scots Songs, Set to Musick by W. Thomson." London, 1725, fol. [1733, 2 vols. 8vo.] "The Hive. A Collection of the most celebrated Songs." In Four Volumes. 4th ed. London. 1732.
"The British Musical Miscellany, or The Delightful Grove, being a collection of celebrated English and Scottish Songs." London. 1733-36.
"RELIQUES OF ANCIENT ENGLISH POETRY: Consisting of Old Heroic Ballads, Songs, and other Pieces of our Earlier Poets; together with some few of later date. By THOMAS PERCY, Lord Bishop of Dromore." 3 vols. 1st ed. London, 1765. [4th ed. (improved) 1794.--London, L.A. Lewis, 1839.] "ANCIENT AND MODERN SCOTTISH SONGS, Heroic Ballads, &c." By DAVID HERD. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1769. 2d ed. 1776. [3d ed. Printed for Lawrie and Symington, 1791.] "Ancient Scottish Poems. Published from the MS. of George Bannatyne, MDLXVIII." By Sir David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes. Edinburgh, 1770.
"The Choice Spirit's Chaplet: or a Poesy from Parnassus, being a Select Collection of Songs from the most approved authors: many of them written and the whole compiled by George Alexander Slovens, Esq."
Whitehaven, 1771.
"A Collection of English Songs in score for three or four Voices.
Composed about the year 1500. Taken from MSS. of the same age. Revised and digested by John Stafford Smith." London, 1779.
"Scottish Tragic Ballads." John Pinkerton. London, 1781.
"Two Ancient Scottish Poems; The Gaberlunzie-Man and Christ's Kirk on the Green. With Notes and Observations. By John Callender, Esq. of Craigforth." Edinburgh, 1782.
"The Charmer: A Collection of Songs, chiefly such as are eminent for poetical merit; among which are many originals, and others that were never before printed in a songbook." 2 vols. 4th ed. Edinburgh, 1782.
"Select Scottish Ballads." 2 vols. John Pinkerton. London, 1783. Vol.
I. Tragic Ballads, Vol. II. Comic Ballads.
"A Select Collection of English Songs, with their Original Airs, and an Historical Essay on the Origin and Progress of National Song." By J. Ritson. 1788. 2d ed. with Additional Songs and Occasional Notes, by Thomas Park. London, 1813. 3 vols.
"The Poetical Museum. Containing Songs and Poems on almost every subject. Mostly from Periodical Publications." George Caw. Hawick, 1784.
"The Bishopric Garland or Durham Minstrel." Edited by Ritson.
Stockton, 1784. Newcastle, 1792. [London, 1809.] See "Northern Garlands," p. xix.
*"The New British Songster. A Collection of Songs, Scots and English, with Toasts and Sentiments for the Bottle." Falkirk, 1785.
"Ancient Scottish Poems, never before in print, but now published from the MS. collections of Sir Richard Maitland," &c. John Pinkerton. 2 vols. London, 1786.
"The Works of James I., King of Scotland." To which are added "Two Ancient Scotish Poems, commonly ascribed to King James V." (The Gaberlunzie-Man and the Jollie Beggar.) Morrison's Scotish Poets.
Poets. Perth, 1786.
"THE SCOTS MUSICAL MUSEUM. In six volumes. Consisting of Six Hundred Scots Songs, with proper Basses for the Piano Forte," &c. By James Johnson. Edinburgh, 1787-1803. [3d ed. "with copious Notes and Illustrations of the Lyric Poetry and Music of Scotland, by the late Wiliam Stenhouse," and "with additional Notes and Illustrations," by David Laing. 4 vols. Edinburgh and London, 1853.] "The Yorkshire Garland." Edited by Ritson. York, 1788. See "Northern Garlands," p. xix.
*"A Select Collection of Favourite Scottish Ballads." 6 vols. R.
Morison & Son. Perth, 1790.
"Pieces of Ancient Popular Poetry: From Authentic Manuscripts and Old Printed Copies. By Joseph Ritson, Esq." London, 1791. [Second Edition, London, 1833.] "Ancient Songs and Ballads, from the Reign of King Henry the Second to the Revolution. Collected by Joseph Ritson, Esq." 2 vols. Printed 1787, dated 1790, published 1792. [London, 1829.] "Scottish Poems, reprinted from scarce editions, with three pieces before unpublished." Collected by John Pinkerton. 8 vols. London, 1792.
*"The Melodies of Scotland, &c. The Poetry chiefly by Burns. The whole collected by George Thomson." Lond. & Edin. 6 vols. 1793-1841. See p.
xx., last title but one.
"The Northumberland Garland." Edited by Ritson. Newcastle, 1793.
[London, 1809.] See "Northern Garlands," p. xix.
"SCOTISH SONG. In two volumes." JOSEPH RITSON. London, 1794.
"ROBIN HOOD: A Collection of all the Ancient Poems, Songs and Ballads, now extant, relative to that celebrated English Outlaw. To which are prefixed Historical Anecdotes of his Life, By JOSEPH RITSON. Esq." 2 vols. 1795. [Second Edition, London, 1832.] "A Collection of English Songs, with an Appendix of Original Pieces."
London, 1798. Lord Hailes.
*"An Introduction to the History of Poetry in Scotland, &c., by Alexander Campbell, to which are subjoined Songs of the Lowlands of Scotland, carefully compared with the original editions." Edinburgh, 1798. 4to.
"Tales of Wonder; Written and collected by M.G. Lewis, Esq., M.P." 2 vols. London, 1800. [New-York, 1801.] "Scottish Poems of the Sixteenth Century." Ed. by J.G. Dalzell.
Edinburgh, 1801. 2 vols. (Contains "Ane Compendious Booke of Godly and Spirituall Songs, collectit out of sundrie Partes of the Scripture, with sundrie of other Ballates, changed out of Prophaine Sanges for avoyding of Sinne and Harlotrie, with Augmentation of sundrie Gude and Godly Ballates, not contained in the first Edition. Newlie corrected and amended by the first Originall Copie. Edinburgh, printed by Andro Hart.") "The Complaynt of Scotland. Written in 1548. With a Preliminary Dissertation and Glossary." By John Leyden. Edinburgh, 1801.
"Chronicle of Scottish Poetry; from the Thirteenth Century to the Union of the Crowns." By J. Sibbald. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1802.
"The North-Country Chorister." Edited by J. Ritson. Durham, 1802.
[London, 1809.] See "Northern Garlands," p. xix.
"MINSTRELSY OF THE SCOTTISH BORDER: Consisting of Historical and Romantic Ballads, collected in the Southern Counties of Scotland; with a few of modern date founded upon local tradition." 1st and 2d vols.
1802, 3d 1803. [Poetical Works of SIR WALTER SCOTT, vols. 1-4. Cadell, Edinburgh, 1851.] "The Wife of Auchtermuchty. An ancient Scottish Poem, with a translation into Latin Rhyme." Edinburgh, 1803.
"A Collection of Songs, Moral, Sentimental, Instructive, and Amusing."
By James Plumtre. 4to. Cambridge, 1805. London, 1824. 3 vols.
"POPULAR BALLADS AND SONGS, from Tradition, Manuscripts, and scarce Editions; with translations of similar pieces from the ancient Danish language, and a few originals by the Editor. By ROBERT JAMIESON." 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1806.
"Ancient (!) Historic Ballads." Newcastle, 1807.
"Scottish Historical and Romantic Ballads, chiefly ancient." By John Finlay. 2 vols. Edinburgh 1808.
"Remains of Nithsdale and Galloway Song," &c. By R.H. Cromek. London, 1810.
"Old Ballads, Historical and Narrative, with some of modern date:
collected from Rare Copies and MSS." By Thomas Evans. 2 vols. 1777. 4 vols. 1784. [New edition, revised and enlarged by R.H. Evans. 4 vols.
London, 1810.] "Select Scottish Songs, Ancient and Modern, with Critical and Biographical Notices, by Robert Burns. Edited by R.H. Cromek." London.
1810. 2 vols.
"Essay on Song-Writing; with a Selection of such English Songs as are most eminent for poetical merit. By John Aiken. A new edition, with Additions and Corrections, and a Supplement by R.H. Evans." London, 1810.
"Northern Garlands." London, 1810. (Contains The Bishopric, Yorkshire, and Northumberland Garlands, and The North-Country Chorister, before mentioned.) "Bibliographical Miscellanies, being a Collection of Curious Pieces in Verse and Prose." By Dr. Bliss. Oxford, 1813.
"Illustrations of Northern Antiquities, from the earlier Teutonic and Scandinavian Romances, &c., with translations of Metrical Tales from the Old German, Danish, Swedish, and Icelandic Languages." 4to. By Weber, Scott, and Jamieson. Edinburgh, 1814.
"Pieces of ancient Poetry, from unpublished Manuscripts and scarce Books." Fry. Bristol, 1814.
"A Collection of Ancient and Modern Scottish Ballads, Tales, and Songs: with explanatory Notes and Observations." By John Gilchrist. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1815.
"Heliconia. Comprising a Selection of the Poetry of the Elizabethan age, written or published between 1575 and 1604." Edited by T. Park. 3 vols. London, 1815.
*"Albyn's Anthology." By Alexander Campbell. Edinburgh, 1816.
"The Pocket Encyclopedia of Song." 2 vols. Glasgow, 1816.
"Calliope: A Selection of Ballads, Legendary and Pathetic." London, 1816.
Facetiae. Musarum Deliciae (1656), Wit Restor'd (1658), and Wits Recreations (1640). 2 vols. London, 1817.
"The Suffolk Garland: or a Collection of Poems, Songs, Tales, Ballads, Sonnets, and Elegies, relative to that county." Ipswich, 1818.
"The Jacobite Relics of Scotland: being the Songs, Airs, and Legends of the adherents to the House of Stuart. Collected and illustrated by James Hogg." 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1819 and 1821.
"The Harp of Caledonia: A Collection of Songs, Ancient and Modern, chiefly Scottish," &c. By John Struthers. 3 vols. Glasgow, 1819.
"The New Notborune Mayd." Roxburghe Club. London, 1820.
"The Scottish Minstrel, a Selection from the Vocal Melodies of Scotland, Ancient and Modern, arranged for the Piano-Forte by R.A.
Smith." 6 vols. 1820-24.
*"The British Minstrel, a Selection of Ballads, Ancient and Modern;
with Notes, Biographical and Critical. By John Struthers." Glasgow, 1821.
"Scarce Ancient Ballads, many never before published." Aberdeen. Alex.
Laing, 1822.
"The Select Melodies of Scotland, interspersed with those of Ireland and Wales," &c. By George Thomson. London. 6 vols. 1822-25.
"Select Remains of the Ancient Popular Poetry of Scotland." By David Laing. Edinburgh, 1822.
"The Beauties of English Poetry." London, 1823.
"The Thistle of Scotland; a Selection of Ancient Ballads, with Notes.
By Alexander Laing." Aberdeen, 1823.
"Some ancient Christmas Carols, with the tunes to which they were formerly sung in the West of England; together with two ancient Ballads, a Dialogue, &c. Collected by Davies Gilbert." The Second Edition. London, 1823.
"A Collection of Curious Old Ballads and Miscellaneous Poetry." David Webster. Edinburgh, 1824.
"A Ballad Book." By Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe. 1824. (30 copies printed.) "A North Countrie Garland." By James Maidment. Edinburgh, 1824. (30 copies printed.) "The Common-Place Book of Ancient and Modern Ballad and Metrical Legendary Tales. An Original Selection, including many never before published." Edinburgh, 1824.
*"The Scottish Caledonian Encyclopaedia; or, the Original, Antiquated, and Natural Curiosities of the South of Scotland, interspersed with Scottish Poetry." By John Mactaggart. London, 1824.
"Gleanings of Scotch, English, and Irish scarce Old Ballads, chiefly Tragical and Historical." By Peter Buchan. Peterhead, 1825.
"The Songs of Scotland, Ancient and Modern; with an Introduction and Notes," &c. By Allan Cunningham. 4 vols. London, 1825.
"Early Metrical Tales." By David Laing. Edinburgh, 1826.
"ANCIENT SCOTTISH BALLADS, recovered from Tradition, and never before published: with Notes, Historical and Explanatory, and an Appendix, containing the Airs of several of the Ballads." By GEORGE R. KINLOCH.
Edinburgh, 1827.
"MINSTRELSY, ANCIENT AND MODERN, with an Historical Introduction and Notes. By WILLIAM MOTHERWELL." Glasgow, 1827.
"The Ballad-Book." By George R. Kinloch. Edinburgh, 1827. (30 copies printed.) "Ancient Ballads and Songs, chiefly from Tradition, Manuscripts, and Scarce Works," &c. By Thomas Lyle. London, 1827.
"The Knightly Tale of Golagrus and Gawane, and other Ancient Poems.
Printed at Edinburgh, by W. Chepman and A. Myllar in the year M.D. VIII. Reprinted MD.CCC.XXVII."
"Ancient Ballads and Songs of the North of Scotland, hitherto unpublished." By Peter Buchan. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1828.
"Jacobite Minstrelsy, with Notes illustrative of the Text, and containing Historical Details in Relation to the House of Stuart from 1640 to 1784." Glasgow, 1829.
"The Scottish Ballads; Collected and Illustrated by Robert Chambers."
Edinburgh, 1829.
"The Scottish Songs; Collected and Illustrated by Robert Chambers." 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1829.
"Ancient Metrical Tales: printed chiefly from Original Sources." By C.H. Hartshorne. London, 1829.
"Christmas Carols, Ancient and Modern, including the most popular in the West of England, and the airs to which they were sung," &c. By W.
Sandys. London, 1833.
"The Bishoprick Garland, or a collection of Legends, Songs, Ballads, &c., belonging to the County of Durham." By Sir Cuthbert Sharp.
London, 1834.
"The Universal Songster, or Museum of Mirth, forming the most complete, extensive, and valuable collection of Ancient and Modern Songs in the English language." 3 vols. London. 1834.
"Hugues de Lincoln, Recueil de Ballades, Anglo-Normande et Ecossoises, relatives an meurtre de cet enfant," &c. Francisque Michel. Paris, 1834.
"Ballads and other Fugitive Poetical Pieces, chiefly Scottish; from the collections of Sir James Balfour." Edinburgh, 1834. Ed. by James Maidment.
"Lays and Legends of Varions Nations." By W.J. Thoms. London, 1834. 5 parts.
"The Songs of England and Scotland." By Peter Cunningham. 2 vols.
London, 1835.
"Songs and Carols. Printed from a Manuscript in the Sloane Collection in the British Museum." By T. Wright. London, 1836.
"The Nutbrown Maid. From the earliest edition of Arnold's Chronicle."
By T. Wright, London, 1836.
"The Turnament of Totenham, and The Feest. Two early Ballads, printed from a Manuscript preserved in the Public Library of the University of Cambridge." By T. Wright. London, 1836.
"A Little Book of Ballads." Newport, 1836. Printed by E.V. Utterson for the Roxburghe Club.
"Ancient Scotish Melodies, from a Manuscript of the Reign of King James VI., with an Introductory Enquiry illustrative of the History of Music in Scotland." By William Dauncy. Edinburgh, 1838.
"Syr Gawayne; a collection of Ancient Romance-Poems, by Scotish and English authors, relating to that celebrated Knight of the Round Table, with an Introduction, Notes, and a Glossary." By Sir Fred.
Madden. Bannatyne Club. London, 1839.
*"Fruehlingsgabe fuer Freunde aelterer Literatur." By Th. G. v. Karajan.
Vienna, 1839. (Contains English ballads.) "The Political Songs of England, from the Reign of John to that of Edward II. Edited and translated by Thomas Wright." London, 1839. Camden Society.
"A Collection of National English Airs, consisting of Ancient Song, Ballad, and Dance Tunes, interspersed with Remarks and Anecdote, and preceded by an Essay on English Minstrelsy." By W. Chappell. 2 vols.
London, 1838-1840. (see _post_.) "The Latin Poems commonly attributed to Walter Mapes, collected and edited by Thomas Wright." London, 1841. Camden Society.
PUBLICATIONS OF THE PERCY SOCIETY, (1840-1852.) Vol. I. "Old Ballads, from Early Printed Copies of the Utmost Rarity."
By J. Payne Collier. 1840.
"A Collection of Songs and Ballads relative to the London Prentices and Trades, and to the Affairs of London generally, during the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries." By Charles Mackay. 1841.
"The Historical Songs of Ireland: illustrative of the Revolutionary Struggle between James II. and William III. By T. Crofton Croker.
1841.
"The King and a Poor Northern Man. From the edition of 1640." 1841.
Vol. II. "The Early Naval Ballads of England. Collected and edited by J.O. Halliwell." 1841.
"The Mad Pranks and Merry Jests of Robin Goodfellow. Reprinted from the edition of 1628." By J. Payne Collier. 1841.
Vol. III. "Political Ballads published in England during the Commonwealth." By Thomas Wright. 1841.
"Strange Histories: consisting of Ballads and other Poems, principally by Thomas Deloney. From the edition of 1607." 1841.
"The History of Patient Grisel. Two early Tracts in Black-letter."
1842.
Vol. IV. "The Nursery Rhymes of England, collected principally from oral Tradition." By J.O. Halliwell. 1842.
Vol. VI. "Ancient Poetical Tracts of the Sixteenth Century." Reprinted from unique Copies. By E.F. Rimbault 1842.
"The Crown Garland of Golden Roses: Consisting of Ballads and Songs.
By Richard Johnson." Part I. From the edition of 1612. 1842. [Part II., from the edition of 1659, in vol. xv.] Vol. IX. "Old Ballads illustrating the great Frost of 1683-4, and the Fair on the Thames." Collected and edited by E.F. Rimbault. 1844.
Vol. XIII. "Six Ballads with Burdens." By James Goodwin. 1844.
"Lyrical Poems selected from Musical Publications between the years 1589 and 1600." By J.P. Collier. 1844.
Vol. XV. "The Crown Garland of Golden Roses. Part II. From the edition of 1659." 1845.
Vol. XVII. "Scottish Traditional Versions of Ancient Ballads." [From a MS. of Buchan's.] Edited by James Henry Dixon. 1845.
"Ancient Poems, Ballads, and Songs of the Peasantry of England, taken down from oral recitation, and transcribed from private manuscripts, rare broadsides, and scarce publications. Collected and edited by James Henry Dixon." 1846.
Vol. XIX. "The Civic Garland. A Collection of Songs from London Pageants." By F.W. Fairholt. 1845.
Vol. XXI. "Popular Songs illustrative of the French Invasions of Ireland." By T. Crofton Croker. 1845.
Vol. XXIII. "Songs and Carols, now first printed from a manuscript of the Fifteenth Century." By Thomas Wright, 1847.
"Festive Songs, principally of the 16th and 17th centuries: with an Introduction." By William Sandys. 1848.
Vol. XXVII. "Satirical Songs and Poems on Costume: from the 13th to the 19th century." By F.W. Fairholt. 1848.
Vol. XXIX. "The Loyal Garland: a Collection of Songs of the 17th century. Reprinted from a black-letter copy supposed to be unique." By J.O. Halliwell. 1850.
"Poems and Songs relating to George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, and his assassination by John Felton." By F.W. Fairholt.
Vol. XXX. "The Garland of Goodwill, by Thomas Deloney." From the edition of 1678. By J.H. Dixon. 1852.
"Popular Rhymes, Fireside Stories, and Amusements of Scotland." By Robert Chambers, Edinburgh. 1842. [Earlier edition in 1826.] "Selections from the Early Ballad Poetry of England and Scotland.
Edited by Richard John King." London, 1842.
"The Book of British Ballads." By S.C. Hall. 2 vols. 1842. 1844.
"The Book of Scottish Song: collected and illustrated with Historical and Critical Notices, and an Essay on the Song-Writers of Scotland."
By Alex. Whitelaw. 1843. [Glasgow, Edinburgh and London, 1855.] "A New Book of Old Ballads." By James Maidment. Edinburgh, 1844. [60 copies printed.] *Twelve Romantic Scottish Ballads, with Music. Chambers, 1844.
Publications of the Shakespeare Society:
"The Shakespeare Society Papers." Vol. I. 1844. Vol. IV. 1849.
"Illustrations of the Fairy Mythology of A Midsummer Night's Dream."
By J.O. Halliwell. 1845.
"The Moral Play of Wit and Science, and Early Poetical Miscellanies from an Unpublished Manuscript." By J.O. Halliwell. 1848.
"Extracts from the Registers of the Stationers' Company, of Works entered for publication between the years 1557 and 1570. With Notes and Illustrations by J. Payne Collier." 1848. Vol. II. [1570-1587.] 1849.
"The Book of Scottish Ballads; collected and illustrated with Historical and Critical Notices. By Alex. Whitelaw." Glasgow, Edinburgh & London. 1845.
"Reliquiae Antiquae." Wright & Halliwell. 2 vols. London, 1845.
"Essays on Subjects connected with the Literature, Popular Superstitions, and History of England in the Middle Ages." By Thomas Wright. 2 vols. London, 1846.
"The Borderer's Table Book: or Gatherings of the Local History and Romance of the English and Scottish Border. By M.A. Richardson." 8 vols. Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1846.
"The Ballads and Songs of Ayrshire," &c. By James Paterson and Captain Charles Gray. 2 vols. Ayr, 1846-1847.
"The Minstrelsy of the English Border. Being a Collection of Ballads, Ancient, Remodelled, and Original, founded on well-known Border Legends. With Illustrative Notes." By Frederick Sheldon. London, 1847.
"A Book of Roxburghe Ballads. Edited by John Payne Collier." London, 1847.
"Bibliotheca Madrigaliana. A Bibliographical Account of the Musical and Poetical Works published in England during the 16th and 17th centuries, under the titles of Madrigals, Ballots, Ayres, Canzonets,"
&c. By E.F. Rimbault. 1847.
"A Lytell Geste of Robin Hode, with other Ancient and Modern Ballads and Songs relating to this celebrated Yeoman," &c. By John Mathew Gutch. 2 vols. London. 1847.
"Sir Hugh of Lincoln: or an Examination of a curious tradition respecting the Jews, with a Notice of the Popular Poetry connected with it. By the Rev. Abraham Hume." London, 1849.
"Ballads and Poems respecting Hugh of Lincoln." J.O. Halliwell.
Brixton Hill, 1849.
"The Ballad of Edwin and Emma. By David Mallet." With Notes and Illustrations by Frederick T. Dinsdale. London, 1849.
"Musical Illustrations of Bishop Percy's Reliques of Ancient English Poetry. A Collection of Old Ballad Tunes, etc. chiefly from rare MSS.
and early Printed Books," &c. By Edward F. Rimbault. London, 1850.
"The Fairy Mythology. Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of various Countries." By Thomas Keightley. London, 1850.
"Palatine Anthology. A Collection of ancient Poems and Ballads relating to Lancashire and Cheshire. The Palatine Garland. Being a Selection of Ballads and Fragments supplementary to the Palatine Anthology." By J.O. Halliwell. 1850. [Privately printed.] "A New Boke about Shakespeare and Stratford-on-Avon." By J.O.
Halliwell. 1850. [Privately printed.] "A Little Book of Songs and Ballads, gathered from Ancient Musick Books, MS. and Printed." By E.F. Rimbault. London, 1851.
"The Sussex Garland. A collection of Ballads, Sonnets, Tales, Elegies, Songs, Epitaphs, &c. illustrative of the County of Sussex." By James Taylor. Newick, 1851.
"The Yorkshire Anthology. A Collection of Ancient and Modern Ballads, Poems and Songs, relating to the County of Yorkshire. Collected by J.O.
Halliwell." London, 1851. [Privately printed.] "The Norfolk Anthology. A Collection of Poems, Ballads, and Rare Tracts, relating to the County of Norfolk." Collected by J.O. Halliwell. 1852.
[Privately printed.] "The Illustrated Book of English Songs. From the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth Century." Illustrated London Library. London, (about) 1852.
"The Illustrated Book of Scottish Songs. From the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth Century." Illustrated London Library. London, (about) 1852.
"The Great Hero of the Ancient Minstrelsy of England, Robin Hood," &c.
By Joseph Hunter. London, 1852.
"The Literature and Romance of Northern Europe, &c.; with copious specimens of the most celebrated Histories, Romances, Popular Legends and Tales, old Chivalrous Ballads," &c. By William & Mary Howitt. 2 vols. London, 1852.
"The Pictorial Book of Ancient Ballad Poetry of Great Britain, Historical, Traditional, and Romantic: to which are added a Selection of Modern Imitations, and some Translations." By J.S. Moore. London, 1853.
"The Songs of Scotland adapted to their appropriate Melodies," &c.
Illustrated with Historical, Biographical, and Critical Notices. By George Farquhar Graham. 8 vols. Edinburgh, 1854-6.
"Songs from the Dramatists." Edited by Robert Bell. Annotated Edition of the English Poets. London, 1854.
"Popular Music of the Olden Time; a Collection of Ancient Songs, Ballads, and Dance Tunes, illustrative of the National Music of England. With short introductions to the different reigns, and notices of the airs from writers of the 16th and 17th centuries. Also a short account of the Minstrels." By W. Chappell. London. Begun, 1855.
Complete in 2 vols.
"Reliques of Ancient Poetry, &c. (Percy's.) To which is now added a Supplement of many curious Historical and Narrative Ballads, reprinted from Rare Copies." Philadelphia, 1855.
"Early Ballads illustrative of History, Traditions and Customs." By R.
Bell. Annotated Edition of the English Poets. London, 1856.
"Ballads and Songs. By David Mallet. A new Edition, with Notes and Illustrations and a Memoir of the Author." By Frederick Dinsdale.
London, 1857.
"Ancient Poems, Ballads, and Songs of the Peasantry of England. Edited by Robert Bell." London, 1857.
"The Ballads of Scotland. Edited by William Edmondstoune Aytoun." 2 vols. Edinburgh and London, 1858. 2d ed., 1859.
"The Romantic Scottish Ballads: Their Epoch and Authorship. Edinburgh Papers. By Robert Chambers." Lond. &. Ed. 1859.
"The Romantic Scottish Ballads and the Lady Wardlaw Heresy. By Norval Clyne." Aberdeen, 1859.
"Political Poems and Songs relating to English History, composed during the Period from the Accession of Edward III. to that of Richard III." By Thomas Wright. Vol. I. London, 1869. (Published by the British Government.) The Ballads and Songs of Yorkshire. By C.J.D. Ingledew. (Announced.) The Jacobite Minstrelsy of Scotland. By Charles Mackay (Announced.) The Gentleman's Magazine, *The Scots Magazine, The Retrospective Review, The British Bibliographer, Censura Literara, Restituta, Notes and Queries, &c.
The full titles of the principal collections of ballad-poetry in other languages, referred to in these volumes, are as follows:-- "Udvalgte Danske Viser fra Middelalderen; efter A.S. Vedels og P. Syvs trykte Udgaver og efter haandskrevne Samlinger udgivne paa ny af Abrahamson, Nyerup, og Rahbek." Copenhagen, 1812-1814. 5 vols.
DANMARKS GAMLE FOLKEVISER, UDGIVNE AF SVEND GRUNDTVIG. 2 vols., and the first part of the third. Copenhagen, 1853-58.
"Svenska Folk-Visor fran Forntiden, samlade och utgifne af Er. Gust.
Geijer och Arv. Aug. Afzelius." Stockholm, 1814-1816. 3 vols.
"Svenska Fornsanger. En Samling af Kaempavisor, Folk-Visor, Lekar och Dansar, samt Barn- och Vall-Sanger. Utgifne af Adolf Iwar Arwidsson."
Stockholm, 1834-1842. 3 vols.
"Altdaenische Heldenlieder, Balladen, und Maehrchen, uebersetzt von Wilhelm Carl Grimm." Heidelberg, 1811.
"Des Knaben Wunderhorn. Alte dentsche Lieder." Arnim & Brentano. 3 vols. Heidelberg, 1806-8. 2d ed. of first part in 1819.
"Die Volkslieder der Deutschen, etc. Herausgegeben durch Friedrich Karl Freiherrn von Erlach." Mannheim, 1834-36. 5 vols.
"Versuch einer geschichtlichen Charakteristik der Volkslieder Germanischer Nationen, mit einer Uebersicht der Lieder aussereuropaeischer Voelkerschaften." Von Talvj. Leipzig, 1840.
"Schlesische Volkslieder mit Melodien. Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt und herausgegeben von Hoffmann von Fallersleben und Ernst Richter." Leipzig, 1842.
"Alte hoch- und niederdeutsche Volkslieder, in Fuenf Buechern, herausgegeben von Ludwig Uhland." 2 vols. Stuttgart, 1844-5.
"Deutsther Liederhort. Auswahl der vorzueglichern deutschen Volkslieder aus der Vorzeit und der Gegenwart mit ihren eigenthuemlichen Melodien."
Von Ludwig Erk. Berlin, 1856.
"Niederlaendische Volkslieder. Gesammelt und erlaeutert von Hoffmann von Fallersleben." 2d ed. Hannover, 1856.
* * * * * BOOK I.
THE BOY AND THE MANTLE.
No incident is more common in romantic fiction, than the employment of some magical contrivance as a test of conjugal fidelity, or of constancy in love. In some romances of the Round Table, and tales founded upon them, this experiment is performed by means either of an enchanted horn, of such properties that no dishonoured husband or unfaithful wife can drink from it without spilling, or of a mantle which will fit none but chaste women. The earliest known instances of the use of these ordeals are afforded by the _Lai du Corn_, by Robert Bikez, a French minstrel of the twelfth or thirteenth century, and the _Fabliau du Mantel Mautaille_, which, in the opinion of a competent critic, dates from the second half of the thirteenth century, and is only the older lay worked up into a new shape. (Wolf, _Ueber die Lais_, 327, sq., 342, sq.) We are not to suppose, however, that either of these pieces presents us with the primitive form of this humorous invention. Robert Bikez tells us that he learned his story from an abbot, and that "noble ecclesiast" stood but one further back in a line of tradition which curiosity will never follow to its source. We shall content ourselves with noticing the most remarkable cases of the use of these and similar talismans in imaginative literature.
In the _Roman de Tristan_, a composition of unknown antiquity, the frailty of nearly all the ladies at the court of King Marc is exposed by their essaying a draught from the marvellous horn, (see the English _Morte Arthur_, Southey's ed. i. 297.) In the _Roman de Perceval_, the knights, as well as the ladies, undergo this probation. From some one of the chivalrous romances Ariosto adopted the wonderful vessel into his _Orlando_, (xlii. 102, sq., xliii. 31, sq.,) and upon his narrative La Fontaine founded the tale and the comedy of _La Coupe Enchantee_. In German, we have two versions of the same story,--one, an episode in the _Krone_ of Heinrich vom Tuerlein, thought to have been borrowed from the _Perceval_ of Chretien de Troyes, (_Die Sage vom Zauberbecher_, in Wolf, _Ueber die Lais_, 378,) and another, which we have not seen, in Bruns, _Beitraege zur kritischen Bearbeitung alter Handschriften_, ii. 139; while in English, it is represented by the highly amusing "bowrd," which we are about to print, and which we have called _The Horn of King Arthur_. The forms of the tale of the Mantle are not so numerous. The _fabliau_ already mentioned was reduced to prose in the sixteenth century, and published at Lyons, (in 1577,) as _Le Manteau mal taille_, (Legrand's _Fabliaux_, 3d ed., i. 126,) and under this title, or that of _Le Court Mantel_, is very well known. An old fragment (_Der Mantel_) is given in Haupt and Hoffmann's _Altdeutsche Blaetter_, ii. 217, and the story is also in Bruns _Beitraege_. Lastly, we find the legends of the horn and the mantle united, as in the German ballad _Die Ausgleichung_, (_Des Knaben Wunderhorn_, i. 389,) and in the English ballad of _The Boy and The Mantle_, where a magical knife is added to the other curiosities. All three of these, by the way, are claimed by the Welsh as a part of the _insignia_ of Ancient Britain, and the special property of Tegau Eurvron, the wife of Caradog with the strong arm. (Jones, _Bardic Museum_, p. 49.) In other departments of romance, many other objects are endowed with the same or an analogous virtue. In Indian and Persian story, the test of innocence is a red lotus-flower; in _Amadis_, a garland, which fades on the brow of the unfaithful; in _Perceforest_, a rose. The _Lay of the Rose_ in _Perceforest_, is the original (according to Schmidt) of the much-praised tale of Senece, _Camille, ou la Maniere de filer le parfait Amour_, (1695,)--in which a magician presents a jealous husband with a portrait in wax, that will indicate by change of color the infidelity of his wife,--and suggested the same device in the twenty-first novel of Bandello, (Part First,) on the translation of which in Painter's _Palace of Pleasure_, (vol. ii. No. 28,) Massinger founded his play of _The Picture_. Again, in the tale of _Zeyn Alasman and the King of the Genii_, in the _Arabian Nights_, the means of proof is a mirror, that reflects only the image of a spotless maiden; in that of the carpenter and the king's daughter, in the _Gesta Romanorum_, (c. 69,) a shirt, which remains clean and whole as long as both parties are true; in _Palmerin of England_, a cup of tears, which becomes dark in the hands of an inconstant lover; in the _Fairy Queen_, the famous girdle of Florimel; in _Horn and Rimnild_ (Ritson, _Metrical Romances_, iii. 301,) as well as in one or two ballads in this collection, the stone of a ring; in a German ballad, _Die Krone der Koenigin von Afion_, (Erlach, _Volkslieder der Deutschen_, i. 132,) a golden crown, that will fit the head of no incontinent husband. Without pretending to exhaust the subject, we may add three instances of a different kind: the Valley in the romance of _Lancelot_, which being entered by a faithless lover would hold him imprisoned forever; the Cave in _Amadis of Gaul_, from which the disloyal were driven by torrents of flame; and the Well in _Horn and Rimnild_, (_ibid._) which was to show the shadow of Horn, if he proved false.
In conclusion, we will barely allude to the singular anecdote related by Herodotus, (ii. 111,) of Phero, the son of Sesostris, in which the experience of King Marc and King Arthur is so curiously anticipated.
In the early ages, as Dunlop has remarked, some experiment for ascertaining the fidelity of women, in defect of evidence, seems really to have been resorted to. "By the Levitical law," (_Numbers_ v.
11-31,) continues that accurate writer, "there was prescribed a mode of trial, which consisted in the suspected person drinking water in the tabernacle. The mythological fable of the trial by the Stygian fountain, which disgraced the guilty by the waters rising so as to cover the laurel wreath of the unchaste female who dared the examination, probably had its origin in some of the early institutions of Greece or Egypt. Hence the notion was adopted in the Greek romances, the heroines of which were invariably subjected to a magical test of this nature, which is one of the few particulars in which any similarity of incident can be traced between the Greek novels and the romances of chivalry." See DUNLOP, _History of Fiction_, London, 1814, i. 239, sq.; LEGRAND, _Fabliaux_, 3d ed., i. 149, sq., 161; SCHMIDT, _Jahrbuecher der Literatur_, xxix. 121; WOLF, _Ueber die Lais_, 174-177; and, above all, GRAESSE'S _Sagenkreise des Mittelalters_, 185, sq.
_The Boy and the Mantle_ was "printed verbatim" from the Percy MS., in the _Reliques of Ancient English Poetry_, iii. 38.
In the third day of May, To Carleile did come A kind curteous child, That cold much of wisdome.
A kirtle and a mantle 5 This child had uppon, With brouches[L7] and ringes Full richelye bedone.
He had a sute of silke About his middle drawne; 10 Without he cold of curtesye, He thought itt much shame.
"God speed thee, King Arthur, Sitting at thy meate:
And the goodly Queene Guenever 15 I cannott her forgett, "I tell you, lords, in this hall, I hett[L18] you all to heede, Except you be the more surer, Is you for to dread." 20 He plucked out of his poterner,[L21] And longer wold not dwell;
He pulled forth a pretty mantle, Betweene two nut-shells.
"Have thou here, King Arthur, 25 Have thou heere of mee;
Give itt to thy comely queene, Shapen as itt is alreadye.
Itt shall never become that wiffe, That hath once done amisse:"-- 30 Then every knight in the kings court Began to care for his[L32].
Forth came dame Guenever;
To the mantle shee her hied[L34];
The ladye shee was newfangle, 35 But yett shee was affrayd.
When shee had taken the mantle, She stoode as shee had beene madd:
It was from the top to the toe, As sheeres had itt shread. 40 One while was it gule[L41], Another while was itt greene;
Another while was it wadded;
Ill itt did her beseeme.
Another while was it blacke, 45 And bore the worst hue:
"By my troth," quoth King Arthur, "I think thou be not true."
She threw down the mantle, That bright was of blee; 50 Fast, with a rudd redd, To her chamber can shee flee.
She curst the weaver and the walker That clothe that had wrought, And bade a vengeance on his crowne 55 That hither hath itt brought.
"I had rather be in a wood, Under a greene tree, Then in King Arthurs court Shamed for to bee." 60 Kay called forth his ladye, And bade her come neere;
Saies, "Madam, and thou be guiltye, I pray thee hold thee there."
Forth came his ladye, 65 Shortlye and anon;
Boldlye to the mantle Then is shee gone.
When she had tane the mantle, And cast it her about, 70 Then was shee bare 'Before all the rout.'
Then every knight, That was in the kings court, Talked, laughed,[L75] and showted 75 Full oft att that sport.
Shee threw downe the mantle, That bright was of blee;
Fast, with a red rudd, To her chamber can shee flee. 80 Forth came an old knight, Pattering ore a creede, And he proferred to this litle boy Twenty markes to his meede, And all the time of the Christmasse, 85 Willinglye to ffeede;
For why, this mantle might Doe his wiffe some need.
When she had tane the mantle, Of cloth that was made, 90 Shee had no more left on her, But a tassell and a threed:
Then every knight in the kings court Bade evill might shee speed.
Shee threw downe the mantle, 95 That bright was of blee;
And fast, with a redd rudd, To her chamber can shee flee.
Craddocke called forth his ladye, And bade her come in; 100 Saith, "Winne this mantle, ladye, With a little dinne.
Winne this mantle, ladye, And it shal be thine, If thou never did amisse 105 Since thou wast mine."
Forth came Craddockes ladye, Shortlye and anon;
But boldlye to the mantle Then is shee gone. 110 When she had tane the mantle, And cast it her about, Upp at her great toe It began to crinkle and crowt:
Shee said, "Bowe downe, mantle, 115 And shame me not for nought.
Once I did amisse, I tell you certainlye, When I kist Craddockes mouth Under a greene tree; 120 When I kist Craddockes mouth Before he marryed mee."
When shee had her shreeven, And her sines shee had tolde, The mantle stoode about her 125 Right as shee wold, Seemelye of coulour, Glittering like gold:
Then every knight in Arthurs court Did her behold. 130 Then spake dame Guenever To Arthur our king;
"She hath tane yonder mantle Not with right[L134], but with wronge.
See you not yonder woman, 135 That maketh her self soe 'cleane'[L136]?
I have seene tane out of her bedd Of men fiveteene;
Priests, clarkes, and wedded men From her, bydeene: 140 Yett shee taketh the mantle, And maketh her self cleane."
Then spake the little boy, That kept the mantle in hold;
Sayes, "King, chasten thy wiffe, 145 Of her words shee is to bold:
Shee is a bitch and a witch, And a whore bold:
King, in thine owne hall Thou art a cuckold." 150 The little boy stoode Looking out a dore;
'And there as he was lookinge He was ware of a wyld bore.'
He was ware of a wyld bore, 155 Wold have werryed a man:
He pulld forth a wood kniffe, Fast thither that he ran:
He brought in the bores head, And quitted him like a man. 160 He brought in the bores head, And was wonderous bold:
He said there was never a cuckolds kniffe Carve itt that cold.
Some rubbed their knives 165 Uppon a whetstone:
Some threw them under the table, And said they had none.
King Arthur and the child Stood looking them upon; 170 All their knives edges Turned backe againe.
Craddocke had a little knive Of iron and of steele;
He britled[L175] the bores head 175 Wonderous weele, That every knight in the kings court Had a morssell.
The little boy had a horne, Of red gold that ronge: 180 He said there was "noe cuckolde Shall drinke of my horne, But he shold it sheede, Either behind or beforne."
Some shedd on their shoulder, 185 And some on their knee;
He that cold not hitt his mouthe, Put it in his eye:
And he that was a cuckold Every man might him see. 190 Craddocke wan the horne, And the bores head:
His ladie wan the mantle Unto her meede.
Everye such a lovely ladye 195 God send her well to speede.
MS. Ver. 7, branches.
V. 18, heate.
V. 21, poterver.
MS. V. 32, his wiffe.
V. 34, bided.
V. 41, gaule.
MS. Ver. 75, lauged.
MS. Ver. 134, wright.
V. 136, cleare.
MS. V. 175, Or birtled.
THE HORN OF KING ARTHUR.
MS. Ashmole, 61, fol. 59 to 62.
This amusing piece was first published entire in Hartshorne's _Ancient Metrical Tales_, p. 209, but with great inaccuracies. It is there called _The Cokwolds Daunce_. A few extracts had previously been given from the MS., in the Notes to _Orfeo and Heurodis_, in Laing's _Early Popular Poetry of Scotland_. Mr. Wright contributed a corrected edition to Karajan's _Fruehlingsgabe fuer Freunde aelterer Literatur_.
That work not being at the moment obtainable, the Editor was saved from the necessity of reprinting or amending a faulty text, by the kindness of J.O. Halliwell, Esq., who sent him a collation of Hartshorne's copy with the Oxford manuscript.
All that wyll of solas lere, Herkyns now, and [z]e schall here, And [z]e kane vnderstond;
Off a bowrd I wyll [z]ou schew, That ys full gode and trew, 5 That fell some tyme in Ynglond.
Kynge Arthour was off grete honour, Off castellis and of many a toure, And full wyde iknow;
A gode ensample I wyll [z]ou sey, 10 What chanse befell hym one a dey;
Herkyn to my saw!
Cokwoldes he louyd, as I [z]ou ply[z]t;
He honouryd them, both dey and nyght, In all maner of thyng; 15 And as I rede in story, He was kokwold sykerly;
Ffor sothe it is no lesyng.
Herkyne, seres, what I sey;
Her may [z]e here solas and pley, 20 Iff [z]e wyll take gode hede;
Kyng Arthour had a bugyll horn, That ever mour stod hym be forn, Were so that ever he [z]ede.
Ffor when he was at the bord sete, 25 Anon the horne schuld be fette[L26], Ther off that he myght drynk;
Ffor myche crafte he couth thereby, And ofte tymes the treuth he sey;
Non other couth he thynke. 30 Iff any cokwold drynke of it, Spyll he schuld, withouten lette;
Therfor thei wer not glade;
Gret dispyte thei had therby, Because it dyde them vilony, 35 And made them oft tymes sade.
When the kyng wold hafe solas, The bugyll was fett[L38] into the plas, To make solas and game;
And then changyd the cokwoldes chere; 40 The kyng them callyd ferre and nere, Lordynges, by ther name.
Than men myght se game inow[z]e, When every cokwold on other leu[z]e, And [z]it thei schamyd sore: 45 Where euer the cokwoldes wer sought, Befor the kyng thei were brought, Both lesse and more.
Kyng Arthour than, verament, Ordeynd, throw hys awne assent, 50 Ssoth as I [z]ow sey, The tabull dormounte withouten lette;
Ther at the cokwoldes wer sette, To have solas and pley.
Ffor at the bord schuld be non other 55 Bot euery cokwold and his brother[L56];
To tell treuth I must nedes;
And when the cokwoldes wer sette, Garlandes of wylos sculd be fette, And sett vpon ther hedes. 60 Off the best mete, withoute lesyng, That stode on bord befor the kyng, Both ferr and nere, To the cokwoldes he sente anon, And bad them be glad euerychon, 65 Ffor his sake make gode chere.
And seyd, "Lordyngs, for [z]our lyues, Be neuer the wrother with [z]our wyues, Ffor no manner of nede:
Off women com duke and kyng; 70 I [z]ow tell without lesyng, Of them com owre manhed.
So it befell sertenly, The duke off Glosseter com in hy[z]e, To the courte with full gret my[z]ht; 75 He was reseyued at the kyngs palys, With mych honour and grete solas, With lords that were well dyg[z]ht.
With the kyng ther dyde he dwell, Bot how long I can not tell, 80 Therof knaw I non name;
Off kyng Arthour a wonder case, Frendes, herkyns how it was, Ffor now begynes game.
Vppon a dey, withouten lette, 85 The duke with the kyng was sette, At mete with mykill pride;
He lukyd abowte wonder faste, Hys syght on euery syde he caste To them that sate besyde. 90 The kyng aspyed the erle anon, And fast he low[z]he the erle vpon, And bad he schuld be glad;
And yet, for all hys grete honour, Cokwold was Kyng Arthour, 95 Ne galle non he had.
So at the last, the duke he brayd, And to the kyng thes wordes sayd[L98];
He myght no longer forbere;
"Syr, what hath thes men don, 100 That syche garlondes thei were vpon?
That skyll wold I lere."
The kyng seyd the erle to, "Syr, non hurte they haue do, Ffor this was thru[z]h a chans. 105 Sertes thei be fre men all, Ffor non of them hath no gall;
Therfor this is ther penans.
"Ther wyves hath ben merchandabull, And of ther ware compenabull; 110 Methinke it is non herme;
A man of lufe that wold them craue, Hastely he schuld it haue, Ffor thei couth not hym wern.
"All theyr wyves, sykerlyke, 115 Hath vsyd the backefysyke[L116], Whyll thes men were oute;
And ofte they haue draw that draught, To vse well the lechers craft, With rubyng of ther toute. 120 "Syr," he seyd, "now haue I redd;
Ete we now, and make vs glad, And euery man fle care;"
The duke seyd to hym anon, "Than be thei cokwoldes, everychon;" 125 The kyng seyd, "hold the there."
The kyng than, after the erlys word, Send to the cokwolds bord, To make them mery among, All manner of mynstralsy, 130 To glad the cokwolds by and by With herpe, fydell, and song:
And bad them take no greffe, Bot all with loue and with leffe, Euery man ...[L135] with other; 135 Ffor after mete, without distans, The cockwolds schuld together danse, Euery man with hys brother.
Than began a nobull game:
The cockwolds together came 140 Befor the erle and the kyng;
In skerlet kyrtells over one, The cokwoldes stodyn euerychon, Redy vnto the dansyng.
Than seyd the kyng in hye, 145 "Go fyll my bugyll hastely, And bryng it to my hond.
I wyll asey with a gyne All the cokwolds that her is in;
To know them wyll I fond." 150 Than seyd the erle, "for charyte, In what skyll, tell me, A cokwold may I know?"
To the erle the kyng ansuerd, "Syr, be myn hore berd, 155 Thou schall se within a throw."
The bugyll was brought the kyng to hond.
Then seyd the kyng, "I vnderstond, Thys horne that [z]e here se, Ther is no cockwold, fer ne nere, 160 Here of to drynke hath no power, As wyde as Crystiante, "Bot he schall spyll on euery syde;
Ffor any cas that may betyde, Schall non therof avanse." 165 And [z]it, for all hys grete honour, Hymselfe, noble kyng Arthour, Hath forteynd syche a chans.
"Syr erle," he seyd, "take and begyn."
He seyd; "nay, be seynt Austyn, 170 That wer to me vylony;
Not for all a reme to wyn, Befor you I schuld begyn, Ffor honour off my curtassy."
Kyng Arthour ther he toke the horn, 175 And dyde as he was wont beforn, Bot ther was [z]it gon a gyle:
[L178]He wend to haue dronke of the best, Bot sone he spyllyd on hys brest, Within a lytell whyle. 180 The cokwoldes lokyd iche on other, And thought the kyng was their own brother, And glad thei wer of that:
"He hath vs scornyd many a tyme, And now he is a cokwold fyne, 185 To were a cokwoldes hate."
The quene was therof schamyd sore;
Sche changyd hyr colour lesse and more, And wold haue ben a wey.
Therwith the kyng gan hyr behold, 190 And seyd he schuld neuer be so bold, The soth agene to sey.
"Cokwoldes no mour I wyll repreue, Ffor I ame ane, and aske no leue, Ffor all my rentes and londys. 195 Lordyngs, all now may [z]e know That I may dance in the cokwold row, And take [z]ou by the handes."
Than seyd thei all at a word, That cokwoldes schuld begynne the bord, 200 And sytt hyest in the halle.
"Go we, lordyngs, all [and] same, And dance to make vs gle and game, Ffor cokwolds have no galle."
And after that sone anon, 205 The kyng causyd the cokwolds ychon To wesch withouten les;
Ffor ought that euer may betyde, He sett them by hys awne syde, Vp at the hy[z]e dese. 210 The kyng hymselff a gurlond fette;
Uppon hys hede he it sette, Ffor it myght be non other, And seyd, "Lordyngs, sykerly, We be all off a freyry; 215 I ame [z]our awne brother.
"Be Jhesu Cryst that is aboffe, That man aught me gode loffe That ley by my quene:
I wer worthy hym to honour, 220 Both in castell and in towre, With rede, skerlet and grene.
"Ffor him he helpyd, when I was forth, To cher my wyfe and make her myrth;
Ffor women louys wele pley; 225 And therfor, serys, have [z]e no dowte Bot many schall dance in the cokwoldes rowte, Both by nyght and dey.
"And therefor, lordyngs, take no care;
Make we mery; for nothing spare; 230 All brether in one rowte."
Than the cokwoldes wer full blythe, And thankyd God a hundred syth, Ffor soth withouten dowte.
Every cokwold seyd to other, 235 "Kyng Arthour is our awne brother, Therfor we may be blyth:"
The erle off Glowsytur verament, Toke hys leve, and home he wente, And thankyd the kyng fele sythe. 240 Kyng Arthour lived at Karlyon[L241], With hys cokwolds euerychon, And made both gam and gle:
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * *[L243] A knyght ther was withouten les, That seruyd at the kyngs des, 245 Syr Corneus hyght he;
He made this gest in hys gam, And named it after hys awne name, In herpyng or other gle.
And after, nobull kyng Arthour 250 Lyued and dyed with honour, As many hath don senne, Both cokwoldes and other mo:
God gyff vs grace that we may go To heuyn! Amen, Amen.
26, sette. See 59, 211.
38, sett.
56, brothers.
98, spake.
115, MS. baskefysyke.
135, word wanting.
178, Bot he.
241, left at Skarlyon.
243, Three lines omitted in MS.
FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE.
From Percys _Reliques_, iii. 403.
This is one of the few ballads contained in the Percy MS., which we have the pleasure of possessing as it is there written. Having first submitted an improved copy, "with large conjectural supplements and corrections," Percy added this old fragment at the end of the volume:
"literally and exactly printed, with all its defects, inaccuracies, and errata," in order, as he triumphantly remarks, "that such austere antiquaries as complain that the ancient copies have not been always rigidly adhered to, may see how unfit for publication many of the pieces would have been, if all the blunders, corruptions, and nonsense of illiterate reciters and transcribers had been superstitiously retained, without some attempt to correct and amend them."
"This ballad," the Editor of the _Reliques_ goes on to say, "has most unfortunately suffered by having half of every leaf in this part of the MS. torn away; and, as about nine stanzas generally occur in the half-page now remaining, it is concluded that the other half contained nearly the same number of stanzas." The story may be seen, unmutilated and in an older form, in Madden's _Syr Gawayne_, p. 298, _The Weddynge of Syr Gawen and Dame Ragnell_.
The transformation on which the story turns is found also in Chaucer's _Wife of Bath's Tale_, in Gower's tale of _Florent and the King of Sicily's Daughter_; (_Confessio Amantis_, Book I.) in the ballad of _King Henry_ (page 147 of this volume); and in an Icelandic saga of the Danish king Helgius, quoted by Scott in his illustrations to _King Henry, Minstrelsy_, iii. 274.
Voltaire has employed the same idea in his _Ce qui plait aux Dames_, but whence he borrowed it we are unable to say.
Worked over by some ballad-monger of the sixteenth century, and of course reduced to dish-water, this tale has found its way into _The Crown Garland of Golden Roses_, Part I. p. 68 (Percy Society, vol.
vi.), _Of a Knight and a Faire Virgin_.
Kinge Arthur liues in merry Carleile, And seemely is to see;
And there he hath with him Queene Genever, That bride so bright of blee.
And there he hath with him Queene Genever, 5 That bride soe bright in bower;
And all his barons about him stoode, That were both stiffe and stowre.
The King kept a royall Christmasse, Of mirth & great honor; 10 ... when ...
[_About nine stanzas wanting._] "And bring me word what thing it is That women[L13] most desire;
This shalbe thy ransome, Arthur," he sayes, "For Ile haue no other hier." 15 King Arthur then held vp his hand, According thene as was the law;
He tooke his leaue of the baron there, And homword can he draw.
And when he came to merry Carlile, 20 To his chamber he is gone;
And ther came to him his cozen, Sir Gawaine, As he did make his mone.
And there came to him his cozen, Sir Gawaine[L24], That was a curteous knight; 25 "Why sigh you soe sore, vnckle Arthur," he said, "Or who hath done thee vnright?"
"O peace! o peace! thou gentle Gawaine, That faire may thee beffall;
For if thou knew my sighing soe deepe, 30 Thou wold not meruaile att all.
"Ffor when I came to Tearne-wadling, A bold barron there I fand;
With a great club vpon his backe, Standing stiffe & strong. 35 "And he asked me wether I wold fight Or from him I shold be gone;
Or else[L38] I must him a ransome pay, And soe depart him from.
"To fight with him I saw noe cause, 40 Me thought it was not meet;
For he was stiffe and strong with all;
His strokes were nothing sweete.
"Therefor this is my ransome, Gawaine, I ought to him to pay; 45 I must come againe, as I am sworne, Vpon the Newyeers day.
"And I must bring him word what thing it is [_About nine stanzas wanting._] Then King Arthur drest him for to ryde, In one soe riche array, 50 Towards the foresaid Tearne-wadling, That he might keepe his day.
And as he rode over a more, Hee see a lady, where shee sate, Betwixt an oke and a greene hollen; 55 She was clad in red scarlett.
Then there as shold have stood her mouth, Then there was sett her eye;
The other was in her forhead fast, The way that she might see. 60 Her nose was crooked, & turnd outward, Her mouth stood foule a-wry;
A worse formed lady then shee was, Neuer man saw with his eye.
To halch vpon him, King Arthur, 65 This lady was full faine;
But King Arthur had forgott his lesson, What he shold say againe.
"What knight art thou," the lady sayd, "That wilt not speake to me? 70 Of me [be] thou nothing dismayd, Tho I be vgly to see.
"For I haue halched you curteouslye, And you will not me againe;
Yett I may happen, Sir knight," shee said, 75 "To ease thee of thy paine."
"Giue thou ease me, lady," he said, "Or helpe me any thing, Thou shalt haue gentle Gawaine, my cozen, And marry him with a ring." 80 "Why if I helpe thee not, thou noble King Arthur, Of thy owne hearts desiringe, Of gentle Gawaine....
[_About nine stanzas wanting._] And when he came to the Tearne-wadling, The baron there cold he finde[L85]; 85 With a great weapon on his backe, Standinge stiffe and stronge.
And then he tooke King Arthurs letters in his hands, And away he cold them fling;
And then he puld out a good browne sword, 90 And cryd himselfe a king.
And he sayd, "I haue thee, & thy land, Arthur, To doe as it pleaseth me;
For this is not thy ransome sure, Therfore yeeld thee to me." 95 And then bespoke him noble Arthur, And bade him hold his hand[L97];
"And give me leave to speake my mind, In defence of all my land."
He said, "as I came over a[L100] more, 100 I see a lady, where shee sate, Betweene an oke & a green hollen;
Shee was clad in red scarlette.
"And she says a woman will haue her will, And this is all her cheef desire; 105 Doe me right, as thou art a baron of sckill, This is thy ransome, & all thy hyer."
He sayes, "an early vengeance light on her!
She walkes on yonder more;
It was my sister, that told thee this, 110 She is a misshapen hore.
"But heer Ile make mine avow to God, To do her an euill turne;
For an euer I may thate fowle theefe get, In a fyer I will her burne." 115 [_About nine stanzas wanting._] THE SECOND PART.
Sir Lancelott, & Sir Steven, bold, They rode with them that day;
And the formost of the company, There rode the steward Kay.
Soe did Sir Banier, & Sir Bore, 120 Sir Garrett with them, soe gay;
Soe did Sir Tristeram, that gentle knight, To the forrest, fresh & gay.
And when he came to the greene forrest, Vnderneath a greene holly tree, 125 Their sate that lady in red scarlet, That vnseemly was to see.
Sir Kay beheld this ladys face, And looked vppon her suire,-- "Whosoeuer kisses this lady," he sayes, 130 "Of his kisse he stands in feare!"
Sir Kay beheld the lady againe, And looked vpon her snout;
"Whosoeuer kisses this lady," he saies, "Of his kisse he stands in doubt!" 135 "Peace, cozen Kay," then said Sir Gawaine, "Amend thee of thy life;
For there is a knight amongst us all, That must marry her to his wife."
"What! wedd her to wiffe," then said Sir Kay, 140 "In the diuells name anon, Get me a wiffe whereere I may, For I had rather be slaine!"
Then some[L144] tooke vp their hawkes in hast, And some tooke vp their hounds; 145 And some sware they wold not marry her, For citty nor for towne.
And then bespake him noble King Arthur, And sware there, "by this day, For a litle foule sight & misliking, 150 [_About nine stanzas wanting._] Then shee said, "choose thee, gentle Gawaine, Truth as I doe say;
Wether thou wilt haue me in this liknesse, In the night, or else in the day."
And then bespake him gentle Gawaine, 155 With one soe mild of moode;
Sayes, "well I know what I wold say, God grant it may be good!
"To haue thee fowle in the night, When I with thee shold play-- 160 Yet I had rather, if I might, Haue thee fowle in the day."
"What, when lords goe with ther feires[L163]," shee said, "Both to the ale and wine;
Alas! then I must hyde my selfe, 165 I must not goe withinne."
And then bespake him gentle Gawaine, Said, "Lady, thats but a skill;
And because thou art my owne lady, Thou shall haue all thy will." 170 Then she said, "blessed be thou, gentle Gawaine, This day that I thee see;
For as thou see me att this time, From hencforth I wil be.
"My father was an old knight, 175 And yett it chanced soe, That he married a younge lady, That brought me to this woe.
"Shee witched me, being a faire young lady, To the greene forrest to dwell; 180 And there I must walke in womans liknesse, Most like a feeind of hell.
"She witched my brother to a carlist b....
[_About nine stanzas wanting._] That looked soe foule, and that was wont On the wild more to goe. 185 "Come kisse her, brother Kay," then said Sir Gawaine, "And amend the of thy liffe;
I sweare this is the same lady That I marryed to my wiffe."
Sir Kay kissed that lady bright, 190 Standing vpon his ffeete;
He swore, as he was trew knight, The spice was neuer soe sweete.
"Well, cozen Gawaine," sayes Sir Kay, "Thy chance is fallen arright; 195 For thou hast gotten one of the fairest maids, I euer saw with my sight."
"It is my fortune," said Sir Gawaine;
"For my vnckle Arthurs sake, I am glad as grasse wold be of raine, 200 Great joy that I may take."
Sir Gawaine tooke the lady by the one arme, Sir Kay tooke her by the tother;
They led her straight to King Arthur, As they were brother and brother. 205 King Arthur welcomed them there all, And soe did lady Geneuer, his queene;
With all the knights of the Round Table, Most seemly to be seene.
King Arthur beheld that lady faire, 210 That was soe faire & bright;
He thanked Christ in Trinity For Sir Gawaine, that gentle knight.
Soe did the knights, both more and lesse, 220 Rejoyced all that day, For the good chance that hapened was To Sir Gawaine and his lady gay.
13, Y^e a woman.
24, Cawaine.
38, O else.
85, srinde.
97, hands.
100, The.
144, soome.
163, seires.
KING ARTHUR'S DEATH.
A FRAGMENT.
_Reliques of English Poetry_, iii, 67.
"The subject of this ballad is evidently taken from the old romance _Morte Arthur_, but with some variations, especially in the concluding stanzas; in which the author seems rather to follow the traditions of the old Welsh Bards, who 'believed that King Arthur was not dead, but conveied awaie by the Fairies into some pleasant place, where he should remaine for a time, and then returne againe and reign in as great authority as ever.' (Holinshed, B. 5, c. 14.) Or, as it is expressed in an old chronicle printed at Antwerp, 1493, by Ger. de Leew: 'The Bretons supposen, that he [King Arthur] shall come yet and conquere all Bretaigne, for certes this is the prophicye of Merlyn, He sayd, that his deth shall be doubteous; and sayd soth, for men thereof yet have doubte, and shullen for ever more,--for men wyt not whether that he lyveth or is dede.' See more ancient testimonies in Selden's Notes on Polyolbion, Song 3.
"This fragment, being very incorrect and imperfect in the original MS., hath received some conjectural emendations, and even a supplement of three or four stanzas composed from the romance of _Morte Arthur_."
PERCY.
* * * * * On Trinitye Mondaye in the morne, This sore battayle was doom'd to bee, Where manye a knighte cry'd, Well-awaye!
Alacke, it was the more pittie.
Ere the first crowinge of the cocke, 5 When as the kinge in his bed laye, He thoughte Sir Gawaine[L7] to him came, And there to him these wordes did saye.
"Nowe, as you are mine unkle deare, And as you prize your life, this daye 10 O meet not with your foe in fighte;
Putt off the battayle, if yee maye.
"For Sir Launcelot is nowe in Fraunce, And with him many an hardye knighte:
Who will within this moneth be backe, 15 And will assiste yee in the fighte."
The kinge then call'd his nobles all, Before the breakinge of the daye;
And tolde them howe Sir Gawaine came, And there to him these wordes did saye. 20 His nobles all this counsayle gave, That earlye in the morning, hee Shold send awaye an herauld at armes, To aske a parley faire and free.
Then twelve good knightes King Arthur chose, The best of all that with him were, 25 To parley with the foe in field, And make with him agreement faire.
The king he charged all his hoste, In readinesse there for to bee; 30 But noe man sholde noe weapon sturre, Unlesse a sword drawne they shold see.
And Mordred, on the other parte, Twelve of his knights did likewise bringe, The beste of all his companye, 35 To holde the parley with the kinge.
Sir Mordred alsoe charged his hoste, In readinesse there for to bee;
But noe man sholde noe weapon sturre, But if a sworde drawne they shold see. 40 For he durste not his unkle[L41] truste, Nor he his nephewe[L42], sothe to tell;
Alacke! it was a woefulle case, As ere in Christentye befelle.
But when they were together mette, 45 And both to faire accordance broughte, And a month's league betweene them sette, Before the battayle sholde be foughte, An addere crept forth of a bushe, Stunge one o' the king's knightes on the knee; 50 Alacke! it was a woefulle chance, As ever was in Christentie.
When the knighte found him wounded sore, And sawe the wild-worme hanginge there, His sworde he from his scabberde drewe; 55 A piteous case, as ye shall heare.
For when the two hostes sawe the sworde, They joyned battayle instantlye;
Till of so manye noble knightes, On one side there were left but three. 60 For all were slaine that durst abide, And but some fewe that fled awaye:
Ah mee! it was a bloodye fielde, As ere was foughte on summer's daye.
Upon King Arthur's own partye, 65 Onlye himselfe escaped there, And Lukyn Duke of Gloster free, And the king's butler Bedevere.
And when the king beheld his knightes All dead and scattered on the molde, 70 The teares fast trickled downe his face;
That manlye face in fight so bolde.
"Nowe reste yee all, brave knights," he said, "Soe true and faithful to your trust:
And must yee then, yee valiant hearts, 75 Be lefte to moulder into dust!
"Most loyal have yee been to mee, Most true and faithful unto deathe:
And, oh! to rayse yee up againe, How freelye could I yield my breathe! 80 "But see, the traitor's yet alive!
Lo where hee stalkes among the deade!
Nowe bitterlye he shall abye, And vengeance fall upon his head."
"O staye, my liege," then sayd the duke; 85 "O staye for love and charitie;
Remember what the vision spake, Nor meete your foe, if it may bee."
"O staye mee not, thou worthye wight, This debt my loyal knights I owe: 90 Betide me life, betide me death, I will avenge them of their foe."
Then straite he grasp'd his trustye speare, And on his horse then mounted hee:
As his butler holpe him to his horse, 95 His bowels gushed to his knee.
"Alas!" then sayd the noble king, "That I should live this sight to see!
To see this good knight here be slaine, All for his love in helping mee!" 100 He put his speare into his reste, And to Sir Mordred loud gan crye;
"Nowe sette thyself upon thy guarde, For, traitor, nowe thy death is nye."
Sir Mordred lifted up his sworde, 105 And fierce to meet the king ran hee:
The king his speare he through him thrust, A fathom thorow his bodie.
When Mordered felt the stroke of death, And found that he was wounded soe, 110 He thruste himselfe upon the speare, And strucke the king a deadlye blowe.
Then grimmlye dyed Sir Mordered, Presentlye upon that tree:
And bloody streames ranne from the kinge, 115 Ere to the duke returned hee.
Sir Lukyn then he thus bespake:
"Sir knighte, thou hast been faithfulle tryde;
Nowe take my sword Excalibar[L119], That hangs so freelye by my syde, 120 "O take my sword Excalibar, And there into the river throwe:
For here, henceforth, benethe this tree, All use of weapons I foregoe.
"And fare thee well, thou trustye sword, 125 A better neer had valiant knighte;
With thee full ofte, and many a daye, Have I withstood my foe in fighte.
"With this good fauchion in my hande, Oft have I reapd the bloody feelde: 130 But nowe the fatalle houre is come, That never more I may thee weelde."
The duke to the river side he went, And there his owne sword in threwe he;
But he kept back Excalibar, 135 He kept it back in privitie.
For all of coleyne was the blade, And all the hilte of precious stone:
"And ever alacke!" then sayd the knighte, "Must such a sword awaye be throwne?" 140 Then backe he came unto the kinge, Who sayd, "Sir Lukyn, what did yee see?"
"Nothing, my liege, save that the winde Blewe oer the waters faire and free."
"O goe againe," then said the kinge, 145 "O good Sir Lukyn, goe againe:
Into the rivere throwe my sword, Nor keepe me lingering here in paine."
The duke then to the river went, And the kings scabbard in threwe hee; 150 But hee kept backe Excalibar, And hid it undernethe a tree.
Then backe he came to tell the kinge, Who sayde, "Sir Lukyn, sawe ye oughte?"
"Nothinge, my liege, save that the winde 155 Nowe with the angrye waters fought."
"O Lukyn, Lukyn," said the kinge, "Twice haste thou dealt deceytfullye:
Alacke, whom may wee ever truste, When suche a knighte soe false can bee! 160 "Saye, wouldst thou have thy master dead, All for a sword that wins thine eye?
Now goe againe, and throwe it in, Or here the one of us shall dye."
The duke, all shent with this rebuke, 165 No aunswere made unto the kinge;
But to the rivere tooke the sworde, And threwe it far as he coulde flinge.
A hande and an arme did meete the sworde, And flourishd three times in the air; 170 Then sunke benethe the renninge streme, And of the duke was seene noe mair.
All sore astonied stood the duke, He stood as still, as still mote bee;
Then hastend backe to tell the kinge, 175 But he was gone from under the tree.
But to what place, he cold not tell, For never after hee did him see;
But hee sawe a barge goe from the land, And hee heard ladyes howle and crye. 180 And whether the kinge were there, or not, Hee never knewe, nor ever colde;
For from that sad and direfulle daye, Hee never more was seene on molde.
7. Sir Gawaine had been killed at Arthur's landing on his return from abroad. See the next ballad, ver. 73. P.
41, 42, the folio MS. reads father ... sonne.
119. More commonly called _Caliburn_. In the folio MS. _Escalberd_. P.
THE LEGEND OF KING ARTHUR.
_Reliques of English Poetry_, iii. 76.
"We have here a short summary of King Arthur's History as given by Jeff. of Monmouth and the old Chronicles, with the addition of a few circumstances from the romance _Morte Arthur_.--The ancient chronicle of Ger. de Leew (quoted above in p. 40,) seems to have been chiefly followed: upon the authority of which we have restored some of the names which were corrupted in the MS., and have transposed one stanza, which appeared to be misplaced: _viz._, that beginning at v.
49, which in the MS. followed v. 36.
"Printed from the Editor's ancient folio MS."
PERCY.
Of Brutus'[L1] blood, in Brittaine borne, King Arthur I am to name;
Through Christendome and Heathynesse Well knowne is my worthy fame.
In Jesus Christ I doe beleeve; 5 I am a Christyan bore;
The Father, Sone, and Holy Gost, One God, I doe adore.
In the four hundred ninetieth yeere[L9], Oer Brittaine I did rayne, 10 After my Savior Christ his byrth, What time I did maintaine The fellowshipp of the Table Round, Soe famous in those dayes;
Whereatt a hundred noble knights 15 And thirty sat alwayes:
Who for their deeds and and martiall feates, As bookes done yett record, Amongst all other nations Wer feared through the world. 20 And in the castle off Tyntagill King Uther mee begate, Of Agyana[L23], a bewtyous ladye, And come of 'hie'[L24] estate.
And when I was fifteen yeere old, 25 Then was I crowned kinge:
All Brittaine, that was att an uprore, I did to quiett bringe;
And drove the Saxons from the realme, Who had opprest this land; 30 All Scotland then, throughe manly feates, I conquered with my hand.
Ireland, Denmarke, Norwaye, These countryes wan I all;
Iseland, Gotheland, and Swetheland; 35 And made their kings my thrall.
I conquered all Gallya, That now is called France;
And slew the hardye Froll in feild[L39], My honor to advance. 40 And the ugly gyant Dynabus[L41], Soe terrible to vewe, That in Saint Barnards mount did lye, By force of armes I slew.
And Lucyus, the emperour of Rome, 45 I brought to deadly wracke;
And a thousand more of noble knightes For feare did turne their backe.
Five kinges of Pavye I did kill[L49] Amidst that bloody strife; 50 Besides the Grecian emperour, Who alsoe lost his liffe.
Whose carcasse I did send to Rome, Cladd poorlye on a beere;
And afterward I past Mount-Joye 55 The next approaching yeere.
Then I came to Rome, where I was mett Right as a conquerour, And by all the cardinalls solempnelye I was crowned an emperour. 60 One winter there I made abode, Then word to mee was brought, Howe Mordred had oppressed the crowne, What treason he had wrought Att home in Brittaine with my queene: 65 Therfore I came with speede To Brittaine backe, with all my power, To quitt that traitorous deede;
And soone at Sandwiche I arrivde, Where Mordred me withstoode: 70 But yett at last I landed there, With effusion of much blood.
For there my nephew Sir Gawaine dyed, Being wounded in that sore The whiche Sir Lancelot in fight 75 Had given him before.
Thence chased I Mordered away, Who fledd to London right, From London to Winchester, and To Cornewalle tooke his flyght. 80 And still I him pursued with speed, Till at last wee mett;
Wherby an appointed day of fight Was there agreed and sett:
Where we did fight, of mortal life 85 Eche other to deprive, Till of a hundred thousand men Scarce one was left alive.
There all the noble chivalrye Of Brittaine tooke their end: 90 O see how fickle is their state That doe on fates[L92] depend!
There all the traiterous men were slaine, Not one escapte away;
And there dyed all my vallyant knightes 95 Alas! that woefull day!
Two and twenty yeere I ware the crowne In honor and great fame, And thus by death was suddenlye Deprived of the same. 100 1. MS., Bruitehis.
9, He began his reign A.D. 515, according to the Chronicles.
23, She is named _Igerna_ in the old Chronicles.
24, his, MS.
39, Froland field, MS. Froll, according to the Chronicles, was a Roman knight, governor of Gaul.
41, Danibus, MS.
49, see p. 134, v. 55.
92, feates, MS.
SIR LANCELOT DU LAKE.
This ballad first occurs in the _Garland of Good Will_, and is attributed to Thomas Deloney, whose career as a song-writer extends from about 1586 to 1600. It is merely a rhymed version of a passage in the _Morte D'Arthur_, (Book vi. ch. 7, 8, 9, of Southey's ed.) The first two lines are quoted in the Second Part of Henry IV., A. ii. sc. 4.
The present text is nearly that of the _Garland of Good Will_ (Percy Society, vol. xxx. p. 38), and differs considerably from that of Percy, (_Reliques_, i. 215.) The same, with very trifling variations, is found in _Old Ballads_, (1723,) ii. 21; Ritson's _Ancient Songs_, ii. 188; Evans's _Old Ballads_, ii. 5.
When Arthur first in court began, And was approved king, By force of arms great victories won, And conquests home did bring;
Then into Britain straight he came, 5 Where fifty good and able Knights then repaired unto him, Which were of the Round Table;
And many justs and tournaments Before them there were drest, 10 Where valiant knights did then excel, And far surmount the rest.
But one Sir Lancelot du Lake, Who was approved well, He in his fights and deeds of arms, 15 All others did excel.
When he had rested him a while, To play, to game, and sport, He thought he would go try himself, In some adventurous sort. 20 He armed rode in forest wide, And met a damsel fair, Who told him of adventures great, Whereto he gave good ear.
"Why should I not?" quoth Lancelot tho, 25 "For that cause I came hither."
"Thou seem'st," quoth she, "a goodly knight, And I will bring thee thither "Whereas a[L29] mighty knight doth dwell, That now is of great fame; 30 Therefore tell me what knight thou art, And then what is your name."
"My name is Lancelot du Lake."
Quoth she, "it likes me than;
Here dwells a knight that never was 35 O'ermatch'd[L36] with any man;
"Who has in prison threescore knights And four, that he has bound;
Knights of King Arthur's court they be, And of his Table Round." 40 She brought him to a river side, And also to a tree, Whereon a copper bason hung, His fellows[L44] shields to see.
He struck so hard, the bason broke: 45 When Tarquin heard the sound, He drove a horse before him straight, Whereon a knight lay bound.
"Sir knight," then said Sir Lancelot, "Bring me that horse-load hither, 50 And lay him down, and let him rest;
We'll try our force together.
"And as I understand, thou hast, So far as thou art able, Done great despite and shame unto 55 The knights of the Round Table."
"If thou be of the Table Round"
(Quoth Tarquin, speedilye), "Both thee and all thy fellowship I utterly defie." 60 "That's overmuch," quoth Lancelot tho;
"Defend thee by and by."
They put their spurs unto their steeds, And each at other fly.
They coucht their spears, and horses ran 65 As though there had been thunder;
And each struck them amidst the shield, Wherewith they broke in sunder.
Their horses backs brake under them.
The knights were both astound; 70 To void their horses they made great haste, To light upon the ground.
They took them to their shields full fast, Their swords they drew out than;
With mighty strokes most eagerly 75 Each one at other ran.
They wounded were, and bled full sore, For breath they both did stand, And leaning on their swords awhile, Quoth Tarquin, "Hold thy hand, 80 "And tell to me what I shall ask;"
"Say on," quoth Lancelot tho;
"Thou art," quoth Tarquin, "the best knight That ever I did know;
"And like a knight that I did hate; 85 So that thou be not he, I will deliver all the rest, And eke accord with thee."
"That is well said," quoth Lancelot then;
"But sith it must be so, 90 What is the knight thou hatest thus?[L91] I pray thee to me show."
"His name is Lancelot du Lake, He slew my brother dear;
Him I suspect of all the rest; 95 I would I had him here."
"Thy wish thou hast, but yet unknown;
I am Lancelot du Lake!
Now knight of Arthur's Table Round, King Ban's son of Benwake;[L100] 100 "And I desire thee do thy worst."
"Ho! ho!" quoth Tarquin tho, "One of us two shall end our lives, Before that we do go.
"If thou be Lancelot du Lake, 105 Then welcome shalt thou be;
Wherefore see thou thyself defend, For now defie I thee."
They buckled then together so, Like two wild boars rashing, 110 And with their swords and shields they ran At one another slashing.[L112] The ground besprinkled was with blood, Tarquin began to faint;
For he gave back, and bore his shield 115 So low, he did repent.
This soon espied[L117] Sir Lancelot tho;
He leapt upon him then, He pull'd him down upon his knee, And rushed[L120] off his helm. 120 And then he struck his neck in two;
And when he had done so, From prison, threescore knights and four Lancelot delivered tho.
29, the.
36, E'er match'd.
44, fellow.
92, so.
100, Kind Haud's son of Seuwake.
112, flashing.
117, 'spied.
120, rushing.
THE LEGEND OF SIR GUY.
(Percy's _Reliques_, iii. 143.) "Published from an ancient MS. copy in the Editor's old folio volume, collated with two printed ones, one of which is in black-letter in the Pepys collection." PERCY.
An inferior copy is printed in Ritson's _Ancient Songs and Ballads_, ii. 193.
From an essay on the romance of Sir Guy, read by Mr. Wright before the British Archaeological Association during its meeting at Warwick, we extract the following remarks in illustration of the history of the present ballad, and other similar popular heroic traditions.
"As the Teutonic tribes progressed in their migrations, and settled in new lands--and especially when they received a new faith, and made advances in civilization,--the mythic romances of their forefathers underwent remarkable modifications to adapt them to new sentiments and new manners. Among people who had forgotten the localities to which they referred, they received a new location and became identified with places and objects with which people were better acquainted, and in this manner they underwent a new historical interpretation. It would be no uninteresting task to point out how many romantic tales that are soberly related of individuals of comparatively modern history, are merely new applications of these early myths.
"Among the romances of the Anglo-Danish cycle by no means the least celebrated is that of GUY OF WARWICK. It is one, of the few, which has been preserved in its Anglo-Norman form, since which it has gone through an extraordinary number of versions, and Chaucer enumerated it among the _romances of pris_, or those which in the fourteenth century were held in the highest estimation. It is doubtless one of those stories in which an ancient mythic romance has undergone the series of modifications I have been describing; a legend which had become located by popular traditions in the neighbourhood we are now visiting, in which the contests between northern chieftains are changed into tilts and tournaments, but in which the combats with dragons and giants are still preserved. Whatever may have been the name of the original hero, that which he now bears, Guy, is a French name, and could not have been given till Norman times.
"From the Anglo-Norman poem, so great was its popularity, two or three different English metrical versions were made, which are still found in manuscripts, and the earliest of which, that of the well-known Auchinlech manuscript, has been printed in a very expensive form by one of the Scottish Antiquarian clubs. It was next transformed into French prose, and in that form was popular in the fifteenth century, and was printed by some of the earlier printers. It was finally reduced to a popular chap-book in prose and a broadside ballad in verse, and in these forms was hawked about the streets until a very recent period. Such has in general been the fate of the romantic literature of the middle ages; a remarkable proof of the tenacity with which it has kept its hold on the popular mind." _Gentleman's Magazine_, Sept. 1847, p. 300.
Was ever knight for ladyes sake Soe tost in love, as I, Sir Guy, For Phelis fayre, that lady bright As ever man beheld with eye?
She gave me leave myself to try, 5 The valiant knight with sheeld and speare, Ere that her love she would grant me;
Which made mee venture far and neare.
Then proved I a baron bold,[L9] In deeds of armes the doughtyest knight 10 That in those dayes in England was, With sworde and speare in feild to fight.
An English man I was by birthe:
In faith of Christ a christyan true:
The wicked lawes of infidells 15 I sought by prowesse to subdue.
'Nine' hundred twenty yeere and odde[L17] After our Saviour Christ his birth, When King Athelstone wore the crowne, I lived heere upon the earth. 20 Sometime I was of Warwicke erle, And, as I sayd, of very truth A ladyes love did me constraine To seeke strange ventures in my youth;
To win me fame by feates of armes 25 In strange and sundry heathen lands;
Where I atchieved for her sake Right dangerous conquests with my hands.
For first I sayled to Normandye, And there I stoutlye wan in fight 30 The emperours daughter of Almaine, From manye a vallyant worthye knight.
Then passed I the seas to Greece, To helpe the emperour in his right, Against the mightye souldans hoaste 35 Of puissant Persians for to fight:
Where I did slay of Sarazens, And heathen pagans, manye a man;
And slew the souldans cozen deere, Who had to name doughtye Coldran. 40 Eskeldered, a famous knight, To death likewise I did pursue:
And Elmayne, King of Tyre, alsoe, Most terrible in fight to viewe.
I went into the souldans hoast, 45 Being thither on embassage sent, And brought his head awaye with mee;
I having slaine him in his tent.
There was a dragon in that land Most fiercelye mett me by the waye, 50 As hee a lyon did pursue, Which I myself did alsoe slay.
Then soon I past the seas from Greece, And came to Pavye land aright;
Where I the duke of Pavye killed, 55 His hainous treason to requite.
To England then I came with speede, To wedd faire Phelis, lady bright;
For love of whome I travelled farr To try my manhood and my might. 60 But when I had espoused her, I stayd with her but fortye dayes, Ere that I left this ladye faire, And went, from her beyond the seas.
All cladd in gray, in pilgrim sort, 65 My voyage from her I did take Unto the blessed Holy-Land, For Jesus Christ my Saviours sake.
Where I Erle Jonas did redeeme, And all his sonnes, which were fifteene, 70 Who with the cruell Sarazens In prison for long time had beene.
I slew the gyant Amarant In battel fiercelye hand to hand, And doughty Barknard killed I, 75 A treacherous knight of Pavye land.
Then I to England came againe, And here with Colbronde fell I fought;
An ugly gyant, which the Danes Had for their champion hither brought. 80 I overcame him in the feild, And slewe him soone right valliantlye;
Wherebye this land I did redeeme From Danish tribute utterlye.
And afterwards I offered upp 85 The use of weapons solemnlye At Winchester, whereas I fought, In sight of manye farr and nye.
'But first,' neare Winsor, I did slaye A bore of passing might and strength; 90 Whose like in England never was For hugenesse both in bredth and length.
Some of his bones in Warwicke yett Within the castle there doth lye;
One of his sheeld-bones to this day 95 Hangs in the citye of Coventrye.
On Dunsmore heath I alsoe slewe A monstrous wyld and cruell beast, Calld the Dun-cow of Dunsmore heath;
Which manye people had opprest. 100 Some of her bones in Warwicke yett Still for a monument doth lye, And there exposed to lookers viewe, As wondrous strange, they may espye.
A dragon in Northumberland 105 I alsoe did in fight destroye, Which did bothe man and beast oppresse, And all the countrye sore annoye.
At length to Warwicke I did come, Like pilgrim poore, and was not knowne; 110 And there I lived a hermitts life A mile and more out of the towne.
Where with my hands I hewed a house Out of a craggy rocke of stone, And lived like a palmer poore 115 Within that cave myself alone:
And daylye came to begg my bread Of Phelis att my castle gate;
Not knowne unto my loved wiffe, Who dailye mourned for her mate. 120 Till att the last I fell sore sicke, Yea, sicke soe sore that I must dye;
I sent to her a ring of golde, By which shee knew me presentlye.
Then shee repairing to the cave, 125 Before that I gave up the ghost, Herself closd up my dying eyes;
My Phelis faire, whom I lovd most.
Thus dreadful death did me arrest, To bring my corpes unto the grave, 130 And like a palmer dyed I, Wherby I sought my soule to save.
My body that endured this toyle, Though now it be consumed to mold, My statue, faire engraven in stone, 135 In Warwicke still you may behold.
9, The proud Sir Guy, PC.
17, Two hundred, MS. and PC.
ST. GEORGE AND THE DRAGON.
(From Percy's _Reliques_, iii. 278.) The following rhymed legend, which, like several other pieces in this Book, can be called a ballad only by an objectionable, though common, extension of the term, was printed by Percy (with some alterations) from two "ancient" black-letter copies in the Pepys collection.
Real popular ballads on St. George's victory over the Dragon exist in several languages, though not in English.[B] Such a ballad is known to have been sung by the Swedes at the battle of Brunkeberg in 1471, and one is still sung by the people both of Denmark and Sweden.
Grundtvig gives three copies of the Danish ballad, two of the 16th and 17th centuries, and one of the present. Four versions of the Swedish have been published, of various ages (e.g. _Svenska Folkvisor_, ii.
252). A German ballad is given by Meinert, _Altdeutsche Volkslieder_, p. 254; after him by Erlach, iv. 258; and Haupt and Schmaler have printed two widely different versions of the ballad in Wendish, _Volkslieder der Wenden_, vol. i. No. 285, ii. No. 195. These are all the proper traditional ballads upon this subject which are known to be preserved, unless we include a piece called _Juerg Drachentoedter_ in Zuccalmaglio's _Deutsche Volkslieder_, No. 37, which is of suspicious authenticity. The piece called _Ritter St. Georg_, in _Des Knaben Wunderhorn_, i. 151, is not a proper ballad, but a rhymed legend, like the one here printed, though intended to be sung.
[B] What follows is abridged from Grundtvig, _Danmarks Gamle Folkeviser_, ii. 554.
The hero of these ballads, St. George of Cappadocia, is said to have suffered martyrdom during the persecution in Syria, in the year 303.
In the 6th century he was a recognized saint both in the western and the eastern churches, and his reputation was limited to this character until the 13th. Reinbot von Dorn, (1231-53,) in his poem _Der Heilige Georg_, (Von der Hagen and Buesching's _Deutsche Gedichte des Mittelalters_,) and Vincent de Beauvais (died 1262) in his _Speculum Historiale_ (XII. 131-32), content themselves with recounting his martyrdom, and appear to know nothing about his fight with the Dragon.
The first known writer who attributes this exploit to St. George is Jacobus a Voragine (died 1298), in the _Golden Legend_. Of course it does not follow that the story originated there. It is probable that the legend of the Dragon arose at the time of the Crusades, and indeed was partly occasioned by them, though we ought not hastily to admit, what has been suggested, that it was founded upon some tradition which the Crusaders heard in Syria.
The Byzantians had long before ascribed various miracles to St.
George, but it was the Normans, who, so to say, first pressed him into active military service.