Then out it speaks the parish priest, 205 And a sweet smile gae he;--- "Come ben, come ben, my lily flower, Present your babes to me."
Charles, Vincent, Sam, and Dick, And likewise James and John; 210 They call'd the eldest Young Akin, Which was his father's name.
Then they staid in the royal court, And liv'd wi' mirth and glee;
And when her father was deceas'd, 215 Heir of the crown was she.
97. The regular propitiation for the "proud porter" of ballad poetry.
See, e.g. _King Arthur and the King of Cornwall_, in the Appendix, v.
49: also the note to _King Estmere_, vol. iii. p. 172.
YOUNG HASTINGS THE GROOM.
(Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, p. 287.) "O well love I to ride in a mist, And shoot in a northern wind;
And far better a lady to steal, That's come of a noble kind."
Four-and-twenty fair ladies 5 Put on that lady's sheen;
And as many young gentlemen Did lead her o'er the green.
Yet she preferred before them all Him, young Hastings the Groom; 10 He's coosten a mist before them all, And away this lady has ta'en.
He's taken the lady on him behind, Spared neither the grass nor corn, Till they came to the wood of Amonshaw, 15 Where again their loves were sworn.
And they have lived in that wood Full many a year and day, And were supported from time to time, By what he made of prey. 20 And seven bairns, fair and fine, There she has born to him, And never was in good church door, Nor never gat good kirking.
Once she took harp into her hand, 25 And harped them asleep;
Then she sat down at their couch side, And bitterly did weep.
Said, "Seven bairns have I born now To my lord in the ha'; 30 I wish they were seven greedy rats, To run upon the wa', And I mysel' a great grey cat, To eat them ane an' a'.
"For ten long years now I have lived 35 Within this cave of stane, And never was at good church door, Nor got no good churching."
O then outspak her eldest child, And a fine boy was he,-- 40 "O hold your tongue, my mother dear;
I'll tell you what to dee.
"Take you the youngest in your lap, The next youngest by the hand;
Put all the rest of us you before, 45 As you learnt us to gang.
"And go with us into some good kirk,-- You say they are built of stane,-- And let us all be christened, And you get good kirking." 50 She took the youngest in her lap, The next youngest by the hand;
Set all the rest of them her before, As she learnt them to gang.
And she has left the wood with them, 55 And to a kirk has gane;
Where the good priest them christened, And gave her good kirking.
CLERK COLVILL, OR THE MERMAID.
This ballad exemplifies a superstition deeply rooted in the belief of all the northern nations,--the desire of the Elves and Water-spirits for the love of Christians, and the danger of being exposed to their fascination. The object of their fatal passion is generally a bridegroom, or a bride, on the eve of marriage. See, in the Appendix, _Sir Oluf and the Elf-King's Daughter_, for further illustrations; also the two succeeding pieces.
_Clerk Colvill_ was first printed in Herd's _Scottish Songs_, (i. 217,) and was inserted, in an altered shape, in Lewis's _Tales of Wonder_, (No. 56.) Clerk Colvill and his lusty dame Were walking in the garden green;
The belt around her stately waist Cost Clerk Colvill of pounds fifteen.
"O promise me now, Clerk Colvill, 5 Or it will cost ye muckle strife, Ride never by the wells of Slane, If ye wad live and brook your life."
"Now speak nae mair, my lusty dame, Now speak nae mair of that to me: 10 Did I ne'er see a fair woman, But I wad sin with her fair body?"
He's ta'en leave o' his gay lady, Nought minding what his lady said, And he's rode by the wells of Slane, 15 Where washing was a bonny maid.
"Wash on, wash on, my bonny maid, That wash sae clean your sark of silk;"
"And weel fa' you, fair gentleman, Your body's whiter than the milk." 20 * * * * * Then loud, loud cry'd the Clerk Colvill, "O my head it pains me sair;"
"Then take, then take," the maiden said, "And frae my sark you'll cut a gare." 25 Then she's gi'ed him a little bane-knife, And frae her sark[L27] he cut a share;
She's ty'd it round his whey-white face, But ay his head it aked mair.
Then louder cry'd the Clerk Colvill, 30 "O sairer, sairer akes my head;"
"And sairer, sairer ever will,"
The maiden crys, "till you be dead."
Out then he drew his shining blade, Thinking to stick her where she stood; 35 But she was vanish'd to a fish, And swam far off, a fair mermaid.
"O mother, mother, braid my hair;
My lusty lady, make my bed;
O brother, take my sword and spear, 40 For I have seen the false mermaid."
27, his sark.
LADY ISABEL AND THE ELF-KNIGHT.
From Buchan's _Ballads of the North of Scotland_, i. 22, where it is entitled _The Gowans sae gay_, from the burden.
The hero of the first of the two following ballads would seem to be an Elf, that of the second a Nix, or Merman, though the punishment awarded to each of them in the catastrophe, as the ballads now exist, is not consistent with their supernatural character. It is possible that in both instances two independent stories have been blended: but it is curious that the same intermixture should occur in Norse and German also. See Grundtvig's preface to _Noekkens Svig_, ii. p. 57.
The conclusion in all these cases is derived from a ballad resembling _May Colvin_, vol. ii. p. 272.
We have had the Elf-Knight introduced under the same circumstances at page 128; indeed, the first three or four stanzas are common to both pieces.
Fair lady Isabel sits in her bower sewing, _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
There she heard an elf-knight blawing his horn, _The first morning in May_.
"If I had yon horn that I hear blawing," 5 _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
"And yon elf-knight to sleep in my bosom,"
_The first morning in May_.
This maiden had scarcely these words spoken, _Aye as the gowans grow gay_; 10 Till in at her window the elf-knight has luppen, _The first morning in May_.
"Its a very strange matter, fair maiden," said he, _Aye as the gowans grow gay_, "I canna' blaw my horn, but ye call on me," 15 _The first morning in May_.
"But will ye go to yon greenwood side,"
_Aye as the gowans grow gay_?
"If ye canna' gang, I will cause you to ride,"
_The first morning in May_. 20 He leapt on a horse, and she on another, _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
And they rode on to the greenwood together, _The first morning in May_.
"Light down, light down, lady Isabel," said he, 25 _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
"We are come to the place where ye are to die,"
_The first morning in May_.
"Ha'e mercy, ha'e mercy, kind sir, on me,"
_Aye as the gowans grow gay_; 30 "Till ance my dear father and mother I see,"
_The first morning in May_.
"Seven king's-daughters here hae I slain,"
_Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
"And ye shall be the eight o' them," 35 _The first morning in May_.
"O sit down a while, lay your head on my knee,"
_Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
"That we may hae some rest before that I die,"
_The first morning in May_. 40 She stroak'd him sae fast, the nearer he did creep, _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
Wi' a sma' charm she lull'd him fast asleep, _The first morning in May_.
"Wi' his ain sword belt sae fast as she ban' him, 45 _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
With his ain dag-durk sae sair as she dang him, _The first morning in May_.
"If seven kings' daughters here ye ha'e slain,"
_Aye as the gowans grow gay_, 50 "Lye ye here, a husband to them a',"
_The first morning in May_.
THE WATER O' WEARIE'S WELL.
From Buchan's _Ballads of the North of Scotland_, ii. 201. Repeated in Scottish _Traditional Versions of Ancient Ballads_, Percy Society, xvii. 63.
The three ballads which follow, diverse as they may now appear, after undergoing successive corruptions, were primarily of the same type. In the first (which may be a compound of two ballads, like the preceding, the conclusion being taken from a story of the character of _May Colvin_ in the next volume) the Merman or Nix may be easily recognized: in the second he is metamorphosed into the Devil; and in the third, into a ghost. Full details upon the corresponding Scandinavian, German, and Slavic legends, are given by Grundtvig, in the preface to _Noekkens Svig, Danmarks G. Folkeviser_, ii. 57:
translated by Jamieson, i. 210, and by Monk Lewis, _Tales of Wonder_, No. 11.
There came a bird out o' a bush, On water for to dine;
And sighing sair, says the king's daughter, "O waes this heart o' mine!"
He's taen a harp into his hand, 5 He's harped them all asleep;
Except it was the king's daughter, Who ae wink cou'dna get.
He's luppen on his berry-brown steed, Taen her on behind himsell; 10 Then baith rade down to that water, That they ca' Wearie's well.
"Wide in, wide in, my lady fair, Nae harm shall thee befall;
Aft times hae I water'd my steed, 15 Wi' the water o' Wearie's well."
The first step that she stepped in, She stepped to the knee;
And sighing sair, says this lady fair, "This water's nae for me." 20 "Wide in, wide in, my lady fair, Nae harm shall thee befall;
Aft times hae I water'd my steed, Wi' the water o' Wearie's well."
The next step that she stepped in, 25 She stepped to the middle;
And sighing, says, this lady fair, "I've wat my gowden girdle."
"Wide in, wide in, my lady fair, Nae harm shall thee befall; 30 Aft times hae I water'd my steed, Wi' the water o' Wearie's well."
The niest step that she stepped in, She stepped to the chin;
And sighing, says, this lady fair, 35 "They shou'd gar twa loves twine."
"Seven king's-daughters I've drown'd there, In the water o' Wearie's well;
And I'll make you the eight o' them, And ring the common bell." 40 "Sin' I am standing here," she says, "This dowie death to die;
Ae kiss o' your comely mouth I'm sure wou'd comfort me."
He louted him ower his saddle bow, 45 To kiss her cheek and chin;
She's taen him in her arms twa, And thrown him headlang in.
"Sin' seven king's daughters ye've drown'd there, In the water o' Wearie's well, 50 I'll make you bridegroom to them a', An' ring the bell mysell."
And aye she warsled, and aye she swam, Till she swam to dry land;
Then thanked God most cheerfully, 55 The dangers she'd ower came.
THE DAEMON LOVER.
This ballad was communicated to Sir Walter Scott, (_Minstrelsy_, iii.
195,) by Mr. William Laidlaw, who took it down from recitation. A fragment of the same legend, recovered by Motherwell, is given in the Appendix to this volume, and another version, in which the hero is not a daemon, but the ghost of an injured lover, is placed directly after the present.
The Devil (Auld _Nick_) here takes the place of the Merman (Nix) of the ancient ballad. See p. 198, and the same natural substitution noted in _K.u.H._--_Maerchen_, 3d ed. iii. 253.
"O where have you been, my long, long love, This long seven years and more?"-- "O I'm come to seek my former vows Ye granted me before."-- "O hold your tongue of your former vows, 5 For they will breed sad strife;
O hold your tongue of your former vows, For I am become a wife."
He turn'd him right and round about, And the tear blinded his ee; 10 "I wad never hae trodden on Irish ground, If it had not been for thee.
"I might hae had a king's daughter, Far, far beyond the sea;
I might have had a king's daughter, 15 Had it not been for love o' thee."-- "If ye might have had a king's daughter, Yer sell ye had to blame;
Ye might have taken the king's daughter, For ye kend that I was nane."-- 20 "O faulse are the vows of womankind, But fair is their faulse bodie;
I never wad hae trodden on Irish ground, Had it not been for love o' thee."-- "If I was to leave my husband dear, 25 And my two babes also, O what have you to take me to, If with you I should go?"-- "I hae seven ships upon the sea, The eighth brought me to land; 30 With four-and-twenty bold mariners, And music on every hand."
She has taken up her two little babes, Kiss'd them baith cheek and chin;
"O fair ye weel, my ain two babes, 35 For I'll never see you again."
She set her foot upon the ship, No mariners could she behold;
But the sails were o' the taffetie, And the masts o' the beaten gold. 40 She had not sail'd a league, a league, A league but barely three, When dismal grew his countenance, And drumlie grew his ee.
The masts that were like the beaten gold, 45 Bent not on the heaving seas;
But the sails, that were o' the taffetie, Fill'd not in the east land breeze.-- They had not sailed a league, a league, A league but barely three, 50 Until she espied his cloven foot, And she wept right bitterlie.
"O hold your tongue of your weeping," says he, "Of your weeping now let me be;
I will show you how the lilies grow 55 On the banks of Italy."-- "O what hills are yon, yon pleasant hills, That the sun shines sweetly on?"-- "O yon are the hills of heaven," he said, "Where you will never win."-- 60 "O whaten a mountain is yon," she said, "All so dreary wi' frost and snow?"-- "O yon is the mountain of hell," he cried, "Where you and I will go."
And aye when she turn'd her round about, 65 Aye taller he seem'd for to be;
Until that the tops o' that gallant ship Nae taller were than he.
The clouds grew dark, and the wind grew loud, And the levin fill'd her ee; 70 And waesome wail'd the snaw-white sprites Upon the gurlie sea.
He strack the tap-mast wi' his hand, The fore-mast wi' his knee;
And he brake that gallant ship in twain, 75 And sank her in the sea.
JAMES HERRIES.
From Buchan's _Ballads of the North of Scotland_, (i. 214.) (See the preface to the last ballad but one.) "O are ye my father, or are ye my mother?
Or are ye my brother John?
Or are ye James Herries, my first true love, Come back to Scotland again?"
"I am not your father, I am not your mother, 5 Nor am I your brother John;
But I'm James Herries, your first true love, Come back to Scotland again."
"Awa', awa', ye former lovers, Had far awa' frae me; 10 For now I am another man's wife, Ye'll ne'er see joy o' me."
"Had I kent that ere I came here, I ne'er had come to thee;
For I might hae married the king's daughter, 15 Sae fain she wou'd had me.
"I despised the crown o' gold, The yellow silk also;
And I am come to my true love, But with me she'll not go." 20 "My husband he is a carpenter, Makes his bread on dry land, And I hae born him a young son,-- Wi' you I will not gang."
"You must forsake your dear husband, 25 Your little young son also, Wi' me to sail the raging seas, Where the stormy winds do blow."
"O what hae you to keep me wi', If I should with you go? 30 If I'd forsake my dear husband, My little young son also?"
"See ye not yon seven pretty ships, The eighth brought me to land;
With merchandize and mariners, 35 And wealth in every hand?"
She turn'd her round upon the shore, Her love's ships to behold;
Their topmasts and their mainyards Were cover'd o'er wi' gold. 40 Then she's gane to her little young son, And kiss'd him cheek and chin;
Sae has she to her sleeping husband, And dune the same to him.
"O sleep ye, wake ye, my husband, 45 I wish ye wake in time;
I woudna for ten thousand pounds, This night ye knew my mind."
She's drawn the slippers on her feet, Were cover'd o'er wi' gold; 50 Well lined within wi' velvet fine, To had her frae the cold.
She hadna sailed upon the sea A league but barely three, Till she minded on her dear husband, 55 Her little young son tee.
"O gin I were at land again, At land where I wou'd be, The woman ne'er shou'd bear the son, Shou'd gar me sail the sea." 60 "O hold your tongue, my sprightly flower, Let a' your mourning be;
I'll show you how the lilies grow On the banks o' Italy."
She hadna sailed on the sea 65 A day but barely ane, Till the thoughts o' grief came in her mind, And she lang'd for to be hame.
"O gentle death, come cut my breath, I may be dead ere morn; 70 I may be buried in Scottish ground, Where I was bred and born."
"O hold your tongue, my lily leesome thing, Let a' your mourning be;
But for a while we'll stay at Rose Isle, 75 Then see a far countrie.
"Ye'se ne'er be buried in Scottish ground, Nor land ye's nae mair see;
I brought you away to punish you, For the breaking your vows to me. 80 "I said ye shou'd see the lilies grow On the banks o' Italy;
But I'll let you see the fishes swim, In the bottom o' the sea."
He reached his band to the topmast, 85 Made a' the sails gae down;
And in the twinkling o' an e'e, Baith ship and crew did drown.
The fatal flight o' this wretched maid Did reach her ain countrie; 90 Her husband then distracted ran, And this lament made he:-- "O wae be to the ship, the ship, And wae be to the sea, And wae be to the mariners, 95 Took Jeanie Douglas frae me!
"O bonny, bonny was my love, A pleasure to behold;
The very hair o' my love's head Was like the threads o' gold. 100 "O bonny was her cheek, her cheek, And bonny was her chin;
And bonny was the bride she was, The day she was made mine!"
* * * * * *** The following stanzas from a version of this ballad printed at Philadelphia (and called _The House Carpenter_) are given in Graham's _Illustrated Magazine_, Sept. 1858.
"I might have married the king's daughter dear;"
"You might have married her," cried she, "For I am married to a House Carpenter, And a fine young man is he."
"Oh dry up your tears, my own true love, And cease your weeping," cried he;
"For soon you'll see your own happy home, On the banks of old Tennessee."
THE KNIGHT'S GHOST.
From _Buchan's ballads of the North of Scotland_, (i. 227.) "There is a fashion in this land, And even come to this country, That every lady should meet her lord, When he is newly come frae sea:
"Some wi' hawks, and some wi' hounds, 5 And other some wi' gay monie;
But I will gae myself alone, And set his young son on his knee."
She's ta'en her young son in her arms, And nimbly walk'd by yon sea strand; 10 And there she spy'd her father's ship, As she was sailing to dry land.
"Where hae ye put my ain gude lord, This day he stays sae far frae me?"
"If ye be wanting your ain gude lord, 15 A sight o' him ye'll never see."
"Was he brunt, or was he shot?
Or was he drowned in the sea?
Or what's become o' my ain gude lord, That he will ne'er appear to me?" 20 "He wasna brunt, nor was he shot, Nor was he drowned in the sea;
He was slain in Dumfermling, A fatal day to you and me."
"Come in, come in, my merry young men, 25 Come in and drink the wine wi' me;
And a' the better ye shall fare, For this gude news ye tell to me."
She's brought them down to yon cellar, She brought them fifty steps and three; 30 She birled wi' them the beer and wine, Till they were as drunk as drunk could be.
Then she has lock'd her cellar door, For there were fifty steps and three;
"Lie there wi' my sad malison, 35 For this bad news ye've tauld to me."
She's ta'en the keys intill her hand, And threw them deep, deep in the sea;
"Lie there wi' my sad malison, Till my gude lord return to me." 40 Then she sat down in her own room, And sorrow lull'd her fast asleep;
And up it starts her own gude lord, And even at that lady's feet.
"Take here the keys, Janet," he says, 45 "That ye threw deep, deep in the sea;
And ye'll relieve my merry young men, For they've nane o' the swick o' me.
"They shot the shot, and drew the stroke, And wad in red bluid to the knee; 50 Nae sailors mair for their lord coud do, Nor my young men they did for me."
"I hae a question at you to ask, Before that ye depart frae me;
You'll tell to me what day I'll die, 55 And what day will my burial be?"
"I hae nae mair o' God's power Than he has granted unto me;
But come to heaven when ye will, There porter to you I will be. 60 "But ye'll be wed to a finer knight Than ever was in my degree;
Unto him ye'll hae children nine, And six o' them will be ladies free.
"The other three will be bold young men, 65 To fight for king and countrie;
The ane a duke, the second a knight, And third a laird o' lands sae free."
THE WIFE OF USHER'S WELL.
_Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_, iii. 258.
That the repose of the dead is disturbed by the immoderate grief of those they have left behind them, is a belief which finds frequent expression in popular ballads. Obstinate sorrow rouses them from their grateful slumber; every tear that is shed for them wets their shroud;
they can get no rest, and are compelled to revisit the world they would fain forget, to rebuke and forbid the mourning that destroys their peace.
"Ice-cold and bloody, a lead-weight of sorrow, falls on my breast each tear that you shed,"
says the ghost of Helgi in the _Edda_ to his lamenting wife (_Helgak.
Hundingsb._ II.) The same idea is found in the German ballad, _Der Vorwirth_, Erk's _Liederhort_, No. 46, 46 a, and in various tales, as _Das Todtenhemdchen_, (_K.u.H. Maerchen_, No. 109, and note), etc. In like manner Sir Aage, in a well-known Danish ballad (Grundtvig, No.
90), and the corresponding _Sorgens Magt, Svenska F.V._, No. 6.
"Every time thou weepest for me, Thy heart makest sad, Then all within, my coffin stands full Of clotted blood."
Rarely is the silence of the grave broken for purposes of consolation.
Yet some cases there are, as in a Lithuanian ballad cited by Wackernagel, _Altd. Blaetter_, i. 176, and a Spanish ballad noticed by Talvj, _Versuch_, p. 141. The present ballad seems to belong to the latter class rather than the former, but it is so imperfect that its true character cannot be determined.
Chambers maintains, we think erroneously, that this ballad is a fragment of _The Clerk's Twa Sons o' Owsenford_. See the second volume of this collection, page 63.
There lived a wife at Usher's Well, And a wealthy wife was she, She had three stout and stalwart sons, And sent them o'er the sea.
They hadna been a week from her, 5 A week but barely ane, When word came to the carline wife, That her three sons were gane.
They hadna been a week from her, A week but barely three, 10 When word came to the carline wife, That her sons she'd never see.
"I wish the wind may never cease, Nor fishes[L14] in the flood, Till my three sons come hame to me, 15 In earthly flesh and blood."-- It fell about the Martinmas, When nights are lang and mirk, The carline wife's three sons came hame, And their hats were o' the birk. 20 It neither grew in syke nor ditch, Nor yet in ony sheugh;
But at the gates o' Paradise, That birk grew fair eneugh.
* * * * * "Blow up the fire, my maidens! 25 Bring water from the well!
For a' my house shall feast this night, Since my three sons are well."-- And she has made to them a bed, She's made it large and wide; 30 And she's ta'en her mantle her about, Sat down at the bed-side.
* * * * * Up then crew the red red cock, 35 And up and crew the gray;
The eldest to the youngest said, "'Tis time we were away."-- The cock he hadna craw'd but once, And clapp'd his wings at a', 40 Whan the youngest to the eldest said, "Brother, we must awa.-- "The cock doth craw, the day doth daw, The channerin' worm doth chide;
Gin we be mist out o' our place, 45 A sair pain we maun bide.
"Fare ye weel, my mother dear!
Fareweel to barn and byre!
And fare ye weel, the bonny lass, That kindles my mother's fire." 50 14. Should we not read, for _fishes_ here, _fashes_-- i. e.
troubles?--LOCKHART.
THE SUFFOLK MIRACLE:
_Or, a relation of a young man, who, a month after his death, appeared to his sweetheart, and carried her on horseback behind him for forty miles in two hours, and was never seen after but in his grave._ From _A Collection of Old Ballads_, i. 266. In Moore's _Pictorial Book of Ancient Ballad Poetry_ (p. 463) is a copy from a broadside in the Roxburghe collection.
_The Suffolk Miracle_ has an external resemblance to several noble ballads, but the likeness does not extend below the surface. It is possible that we have here the residuum of an old poem, from which all the beauty and spirit have been exhaled in the course of tradition;
but as the ballad now exists, it is a vulgar ghost-story, without any motive. Regarding the external form alone, we may place by its side the Breton ballad, _Le Frere de Lait_, in Villemarque's _Chants Populaires de la Bretagne_, vol. i. No. 22 (translated by Miss Costello, _Quart. Review_, vol. 68, p. 75), the Romaic ballad of _Constantine and Arete_, in Fauriel's _Chants Populaires de la Grece Moderne_, p. 406 (see Appendix), and the Servian ballad (related to the Romaic, and perhaps derived from it), _Jelitza and her Brothers_, Talvj, _Volkslieder der Serben_, i. 160, all of them among the most beautiful specimens in this kind of literature; and also Buerger's _Lenore_. It has been once or twice most absurdly suggested that _Lenore_ owed its existence to this _Suffolk Miracle_. The difference, indeed, is not greater than between a "Chronicle History" and _Macbeth_; it is however certain that Buerger's ballad is all his own, except the hint of the ghostly horseman and one or two phrases, which he took from the description of a Low German ballad. The editors of the _Wunderhorn_ claim to give this ballad, vol. ii. p. 19. An equivalent prose tradition is well known in Germany. Most of the ballads relating to the return of departed spirits are brought together in an excellent article by Wackernagel in the _Altdeutsche Blaetter_, i. 174.
A wonder stranger ne'er was known Than what I now shall treat upon.
In Suffolk there did lately dwell A farmer rich and known full well.
He had a daughter fair and bright, 5 On whom he placed his chief delight;
Her beauty was beyond compare, She was both virtuous and fair.
There was a young man living by, Who was so charmed with her eye, 10 That he could never be at rest;
He was by love so much possest.
He made address to her, and she Did grant him love immediately;
But when her father came to hear, 15 He parted her and her poor dear.
Forty miles distant was she sent, Unto his brother's, with intent That she should there so long remain, Till she had changed her mind again. 20 Hereat this young man sadly grieved, But knew not how to be relieved;
He sighed and sobbed continually That his true love he could not see.
She by no means could to him send, 25 Who was her heart's espoused friend;
He sighed, he grieved, but all in vain, For she confined must still remain.
He mourned so much, that doctor's art Could give no ease unto his heart, 30 Who was so strangely terrified, That in short time for love he died.
She that from him was sent away Knew nothing of his dying day, But constant still she did remain, 35 And loved the dead, although in vain.
After he had in grave been laid A month or more, unto this maid He came in middle of the night, Who joyed to see her heart's delight. 40 Her father's horse, which well she knew, Her mother's hood and safe-guard too, He brought with him to testify Her parents order he came by.
Which when her uncle understood, 45 He hoped it would be for her good, And gave consent to her straightway, That with him she should come away.
When she was got her love behind, They passed as swift as any wind, 50 That in two hours, or little more, He brought her to her father's door.
But as they did this great haste make, He did complain his head did ake;
Her handkerchief she then took out, 55 And tied the same his head about.
And unto him she thus did say:
"Thou art as cold as any clay;
When we come home a fire we'll have;"
But little dreamed he went to grave. 60 Soon were they at her father's door, And after she ne'er saw him more;
"I'll set the horse up," then he said, And there he left this harmless maid.
She knocked, and straight a man he cried, 65 "Who's there?" "'Tis I," she then replied;
Who wondred much her voice to hear, And was possessed with dread and fear.
Her father he did tell, and then He stared like an affrighted man: 70 Down stairs he ran, and when he see her, Cried out, "My child, how cam'st thou here?"
"Pray, sir, did you not send for me, By such a messenger?" said she:
Which made his hair stare on his head, 75 As knowing well that he was dead.
"Where is he?" then to her he said;
"He's in the stable," quoth the maid.
"Go in," said he, "and go to bed;
I'll see the horse well littered." 80 He stared about, and there could he No shape of any mankind see, But found his horse all on a sweat;
Which made him in a deadly fret.
His daughter he said nothing to, 85 Nor none else, (though full well they knew That he was dead a month before,) For fear of grieving her full sore.
Her father to the father went Of the deceased, with full intent 90 To tell him what his daughter said;
So both came back unto this maid.
They ask'd her, and she still did say 'Twas he that then brought her away;
Which when they heard they were amazed, 95 And on each other strangely gazed.
A handkerchief she said she tied About his head, and that they tried;
The sexton they did speak unto, That he the grave would then undo. 100 Affrighted then they did behold His body turning into mould, And though he had a month been dead, This handkerchief was about his head.
This thing unto her then they told, 105 And the whole truth they did unfold;
She was thereat so terrified And grieved, that she quickly died.
Part not true love, you rich men, then;
But, if they be right honest men 110 Your daughters love, give them their way, For force oft breeds their lives decay.
SIR ROLAND.
From Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, p. 124.
This fragment, Motherwell tells us, was communicated to him by an ingenious friend, who remembered having heard it sung in his youth. He does not vouch for its antiquity, and we have little or no hesitation in pronouncing it a modern composition.
Whan he cam to his ain luve's bouir, He tirled at the pin, And sae ready was his fair fause luve To rise and let him in.
"O welcome, welcome, Sir Roland," she says, 5 "Thrice welcome thou art to me;
For this night thou wilt feast in my secret bouir, And to-morrow we'll wedded be."
"This night is hallow-eve," he said, "And to-morrow is hallow-day; 10 And I dreamed a drearie dream yestreen, That has made my heart fu' wae.
"I dreamed a drearie dream yestreen, And I wish it may cum to gude:
I dreamed that ye slew my best grew hound, 15 And gied me his lappered blude."
* * * * * "Unbuckle your belt, Sir Roland," she said, "And set you safely down."
"O your chamber is very dark, fair maid, And the night is wondrous lown." 20 "Yes, dark, dark is my secret bowir, And lown the midnight may be;
For there is none waking in a' this tower, But thou, my true love, and me."
* * * * * She has mounted on her true love's steed, 25 By the ae light o' the moon;
She has whipped him and spurred him, And roundly she rade frae the toun.
She hadna ridden a mile o' gate, Never a mile but ane, 30 Whan she was aware of a tall young man, Slow riding o'er the plain.
She turned her to the right about, Then to the left turn'd she;
But aye, 'tween her and the wan moonlight, 35 That tall knight did she see.
And he was riding burd alane, On a horse as black as jet;
But tho' she followed him fast and fell, No nearer could she get. 40 "O stop! O stop! young man," she said, "For I in dule am dight;
O stop, and win a fair lady's luve, If you be a leal true knight."
But nothing did the tall knight say, 45 And nothing did he blin;
Still slowly rode he on before, And fast she rade behind.
She whipped her steed, she spurred her steed, Till his breast was all a foam; 50 But nearer unto that tall young knight, By Our Ladye, she could not come.
"O if you be a gay young knight, As well I trow you be, Pull tight your bridle reins, and stay 55 Till I come up to thee."
But nothing did that tall knight say, And no whit did he blin, Until he reached a broad river's side, And there he drew his rein. 60 "O is this water deep," he said, "As it is wondrous dun?
Or it is sic as a saikless maid And a leal true knight may swim?"
"The water it is deep," she said, 65 "As it is wondrous dun;
But it is sic as a saikless maid And a leal true knight may swim."
The knight spurred on his tall black steed, The lady spurred on her brown; 70 And fast they rade unto the flood, And fast they baith swam down.
"The water weets my tae," she said, "The water weets my knee;
And hold up my bridle reins, sir knight, 75 For the sake of Our Ladye."
"If I would help thee now," he said, "It were a deadly sin;
For I've sworn neir to trust a fair may's word, Till the water weets her chin." 80 "O the water weets my waist," she said, "Sae does it weet my skin;
And my aching heart rins round about, The burn maks sic a din.
"The water is waxing deeper still, 85 Sae does it wax mair wide;
And aye the farther that we ride on, Farther off is the other side.
"O help me now, thou false, false knight, Have pity on my youth; 90 For now the water jawes owre my head, And it gurgles in my mouth."
The knight turned right and round about, All in the middle stream, And he stretched out his head to that lady, 95 But loudly she did scream.
"O this is hallow-morn," he said, "And it is your bridal day;
But sad would be that gay wedding, If bridegroom and bride were away. 100 "And ride on, ride on, proud Margaret!
Till the water comes o'er your bree;
For the bride maun ride deep, and deeper yet, Wha rides this ford wi' me.
"Turn round, turn round, proud Margaret! 105 Turn ye round, and look on me;
Thou hast killed a true knight under trust, And his ghost now links on with thee."
APPENDIX.
FRAGMENT OF THE BALLAD OF KING ARTHUR AND THE KING OF CORNWALL.
Printed from the celebrated Percy MS. in Madden's _Syr Gawayne_, p. 275.
The editor has added the following note.
"It has no title, and the first line has been cut away by the ignorant binder to whom the volume was intrusted, but both are supplied from the notice given of the ballad in the Dissertation prefixed to vol.
iii. of the _Reliques_, p. xxxvii. Dr. Percy has added in the margin of the MS. these words: "To the best of my remembrance, this was the first line, before the binder cut it." The poem is very imperfect, owing to the leaves having been half torn away to light fires (!) as the Bishop tells us, but I am bound to add, previous to its coming into his possession. The story is so singular, that it is to be hoped an earlier and complete copy of it may yet be recovered. On no account perhaps is it more remarkable, than the fact of its close imitation of the famous _gabs_ made by Charlemagne and his companions at the court of King Hugon, which are first met with in a romance of the twelfth century, published by M. Michel from a MS. in the British Museum, 12mo., London, 1836, and transferred at a later period to the prose romance of _Galien Rethore_, printed by Verard, fol., 1500, and often afterwards. In the absence of other evidence, it is to be presumed that the author of the ballad borrowed from the printed work, substituting Arthur for Charlemagne, Gawayne for Oliver, Tristram for Roland, etc., and embellishing his story by converting King Hugon's spy into a "lodly feend," by whose agency the _gabs_ are accomplished.
It is further worthy of notice, that the writer seems to regard Arthur as the sovereign of Little Britain, and alludes to an intrigue between the King of Cornwall and Queen Guenever, which is nowhere, as far as I recollect, hinted at in the romances of the Round Table."
"Come here my cozen, Gawain, so gay;
My sisters sonne be yee;
For you shall see one of the fairest Round Tables, That ever you see with your eye."
Then bespake [the] Lady Queen Guenever, 5 And these were the words said shee:
"I know where a Round Table is, thou noble king, Is worth thy Round Table and other such three.
"The trestle that stands under this Round Table," she said, "Lowe downe to the mould, 10 It is worth thy Round Table, thou worthy king, Thy halls, and all thy gold.
"The place where this Round Table stands in, It is worth thy castle, thy gold, thy fee;
And all good Litle Britaine,"-- 15 "Where may that table be, lady?" quoth hee, "Or where may all that goodly building be?"
"You shall it seeke," shee sayd, "till you it find, For you shall never gett more of me."
Then bespake him noble King Arthur, 20 These were the words said hee;
"Ile make mine avow to God, And alsoe to the Trinity, "Ile never sleepe one night, there as I doe another, Till that Round Table I see; 25 Sir Marramiles and Sir Tristeram, Fellowes that ye shall bee.
"Weele be clad in palmers weede, Five palmers we will bee;
There is noe outlandish man will us abide, 30 Nor will us come nye."
Then they rived east and they rived west,[L32] In many a strange country.
Then they travelled[L34] a litle further, They saw a battle new sett; 35 "Now, by my faith," saies noble King Arthur, [_Half a page is here torn away._] But when he came that castle to, And to the palace gate, Soe ready was ther a proud porter, And met him soone therat. 40 Shooes of gold the porter had on, And all his other rayment was unto the same;
"Now, by my faith," saies noble King Arthur, "Yonder is a minion swaine."
Then bespake noble King Arthur, 45 These were the words says hee:
"Come hither, thou proud porter, I pray thee come hither to me.
"I have two poor rings of my finger, The better[L50] of them Ile give to thee; 50 [To] tell who may be lord of this castle," he saies, "Or who is lord in this cuntry?"
"Cornewall King," the porter sayes, "There is none soe rich as hee;
Neither in Christendome, nor yet in heathennest, 55 None hath soe much gold as he."
And then bespake him noble King Arthur, These were the words sayes hee:
"I have two poore rings of my finger, The better of them Ile give thee, 60 If thou wilt greete him well, Cornewall King, And greete him well from me.
"Pray him for one nights lodging, and two meales meate, For his love that dyed uppon a tree;
A bue[L65] ghesting, and two meales meate, 65 For his love that dyed uppon a tree.
"A bue[L67] ghesting, and two meales meate, For his love that was of virgin borne, And in the morning that we may scape away, Either without scath or scorne." 70 Then forth is gone[L71] this proud porter, As fast as he cold hye;
And when he came befor Cornewall King, He kneeled downe on his knee.
Sayes, "I have beene porter, man, at thy gate, 75 [_Half a page is wanting._] ... our Lady was borne, Then thought Cornewall King these palmers had beene in Britt.
Then bespake him Cornewall King, These were the words he said there:
"Did you ever know a comely King, 80 His name was King Arthur?"
And then bespake him noble King Arthur, These were the words said hee:
"I doe not know that comly King, But once my selfe I did him see." 85 Then bespake Cornwall King againe, These were the words said he.
Sayes, "Seven yeere I was clad and fed, In Litle Brittaine, in a bower;
I had a daughter by King Arthurs wife, 90 It now is called my flower;
For King Arthur, that kindly cockward, Hath none such in his bower.
"For I durst sweare, and save my othe, That same lady soe bright, 95 That a man that were laid on his death-bed Wold open his eyes on her to have sight."
"Now, by my faith," sayes noble King Arthur, "And thats a full faire wight!"
And then bespoke Cornewall [King] againe, 100 And these were the words he said:[L101] "Come hither, five or three of my knights, And feitch me downe my steed;
King Arthur, that foule cockeward, Hath none such, if he had need. 105 "For I can ryde him as far on a day, As King Arthur can doe any of his on three.
And is it not a pleasure for a King, When he shall ryde forth on his journey?
"For the eyes that beene in his head, 110 They[L111] glister as doth the gleed;"-- "Now, by my faith," says noble King Arthur, [_Half a page is wanting._] No body....
But one thats learned to speake.
Then King Arthur to his bed was brought, 115 A greeived man was hee;
And soe were all his fellowes with him, From him they[L118] thought never to flee.
Then take they did that lodly boome,[L119] And under thrubchandler[L120] closed was hee; 120 And he was set by King Arthurs bed-side, To heere theire talke, and theire com'nye;
That he might come forth, and make proclamation, Long before it was day;
It was more for King Cornwalls pleasure, 125 Then it was for King Arthurs pay.
And when King Arthur on his bed was laid, These were the words said hee:
"Ile make mine avow to God, And alsoe to the Trinity, 130 That Ile be the bane of Cornwall Kinge Litle Brittaine or ever I see!"
"It is an unadvised vow," saies Gawaine the gay, "As ever king hard make I;
But wee that beene five christian men, 135 Of the christen faith are wee;
And we shall fight against anoynted King, And all his armorie."
And then he spake him noble Arthur, And these were the words said he: 140 "Why, if thou be afraid, Sir Gawaine the gay, Goe home, and drinke wine in thine owne country."
32, the rived west.
34, tranckled.
50, They better.
65, bue, _sic_.
67, bue, _sic_; of two.
71, his gone.
101, said he.
111, The.
118, the.
119, goome?
120, thrubchadler.
THE THIRD PARTE.
And then bespake Sir Gawaine the gay, And these were the words said hee:
"Nay, seeing you have made such a hearty vow, 145 Here another vow make will I.
"Ile make mine avow to God, And alsoe to the Trinity, That I will have yonder faire lady To Litle Brittaine with mee. 150 "Ile hose her hourly to my hart,[L151] And with her Ile worke my will;
[_Half a page is wanting._] These were the words sayd hee:
"Befor I wold wrestle with yonder feend, It is better be drowned in the sea." 155 And then bespake Sir Bredbeddle, And these were the words said he:
"Why, I will wrestle with yon lodly feend, God! my governor thou shalt bee."
Then bespake him noble Arthur, 160 And these were the[L161] words said he:
"What weapons wilt thou have, thou gentle knight?
I pray thee tell to me."
He sayes, "Collen brand Ile have in my hand, And a Millaine knife fast be my knee; 165 And a Danish axe fast in my hands, That a sure weapon I thinke wilbe."
Then with his Collen brand, that he had in his hand, The bunge of the trubchandler he burst in three.
What that start out a lodly feend, 170 With seven heads, and one body.
The fyer towards the element flew, Out of his mouth, where was great plentie;
The knight stoode in the middle, and fought, That it was great joy to see. 175 Till his Collaine brand brake in his hand, And his Millaine knife burst on his knee;
And then the Danish axe burst in his hand first, That a sur weapon he thought shold be.
But now is the knight left without any weapone, 180 And alacke! it was the more pitty;
But a surer weapon then had he one, Had never Lord in Christentye:
And all was but one litle booke, He found it by the side of the sea. 185 He found it at the sea-side, Wrucked upp in a floode;
Our Lord had written it with his hands, And sealed it with his bloode.
[_Half a page is wanting._] "That thou doe.... 190 But ly still in that wall of stone;
Till I have beene with noble King Arthur, And told him what I have done."
And when he came to the King's chamber, He cold of his curtesie 195 Saye, "Sleep you, wake you, noble King Arthur?
And ever Jesus watch yee!"
"Nay, I am not sleeping, I am waking,"
These were the words said hee:
"For thee I have car'd; how hast thou fared? 200 O gentle knight, let me see."
The knight wrought the King his booke, Bad him behold, reede, and see;
And ever he found it on the backside of the leafe, As noble Arthur wold wish it to be. 205 And then bespake him King Arthur, "Alas! thou gentle knight, how may this be, That I might see him in the same licknesse, That he stood unto thee?"
And then bespake him the Greene Knight,[L210] 210 These were the words said hee:
"If youle stand stifly in the battell stronge, For I have won all the victory."
Then bespake him the King againe, And these were the words said hee: 215 "If we stand not stifly in this battell strong, Wee are worthy to be hanged all on a tree."
Then bespake him the Greene Knight, These were the words said hee:
Saies, "I doe coniure thee, thou fowle feend, 220 In the same licknesse thou stood unto me."
With that start out a lodly feend, With seven heads, and one body;
The fier towarde the element flaugh, Out of his mouth, where was great plenty. 225 The knight stood in the middle....
[_Half a page is wanting._] ... the space of an houre, I know not what they did.
And then bespake him the Greene Knight, And these were the words said he: 230 Saith, "I coniure thee, thou fowle feend, That thou feitch downe the steed that we see."
And then forth is gone Burlow-beanie, As fast as he cold hie;
And feitch he did that faire steed, 235 And came againe by and by.
Then bespake him Sir Marramile, And these were the words said hee:
"Riding of this steed, brother Bredbeddle, The mastery belongs to me." 240 Marramiles tooke the steed to his hand, To ryd him he was full bold;
He cold noe more make him goe, Then a child of three yeere old.
He laid[L245] uppon him with heele and hand, 245 With yard that was soe fell;
"Helpe! brother Bredbeddle," says Marramile, "For I thinke he be the devill of hell.
"Helpe! brother Bredbeddle," says Marramile.
"Helpe! for Christs pittye; 250 For without thy help, brother Bredbeddle, He will never be rydden for me."[L252] Then bespake him Sir Bredbeddle, These were the words said he:
"I coniure thee, thou Burlow-beane,[L255] 255 Thou tell me how this steed was riddin in his country."
He saith, "There is a gold wand, Stands in King Cornwalls study windowe.
"Let him take that wand in that window, And strike three strokes on that steed; 260 And then he will spring forth of his hand, As sparke doth out of gleede."
Then bespake him the Greene Knight, [_Half a page is wanting._] A lowd blast....
And then bespake Sir Bredbeddle, 265 To the feend these words said hee:
Says, "I coniure thee, thou Burlow-beanie, The powder-box thou feitch me."
Then forth is gone Burlow-beanie, As fast as he cold hie; 270 And feich he did the powder-box, And came againe by and by.
Then Sir Tristeram tooke powder forth of that box, And blent it with warme sweet milke;
And there put it unto the horne, 275 And swilled it about in that ilke.
Then he tooke the horne in his hand, And a lowd blast he blew;
He rent the horne up to the midst, All his fellowes this they knew.[L280] 280 Then bespake him the Greene Knight, These were the words said he:
Saies. "I coniure thee, thou Burlow-beanie, That thou feitch me the sword that I see."
Then forth is gone Burlow-beanie, 285 As fast as he cold hie;
And feitch he did that faire sword, And came againe by and by.
Then bespake him Sir Bredbeddle, To the king these words said he: 290 "Take this sword in thy hand, thou noble King, For the vowes sake that thou made Ile give it thee;
And goe strike off King Cornewalls head, In bed where he doth lye."[L294] Then forth is gone noble King Arthur, 295 As fast as he cold hye;
And strucken he hath King Cornwalls head, And came againe by and by.
He put the head upon a swords point, [_The poem terminates here abruptly._] 151, hurt.
161, they words.
210, The Greene Knight is Sir Bredbeddle.
245, sayed.
252, p' me, _i.e._ pro or per.
255, Burlow-leane.
280, the knew.
294, were.
FRAGMENT OF CHILD ROWLAND AND BURD ELLEN.
It is not impossible that this ballad should be the one quoted by Edgar in _King Lear_, (Act iii. sc. 4:) "Child Rowland to the dark tower came."
We have extracted the fragment given by Jamieson, with the breaks in the story filled out, from _Illustrations of Northern Antiquities_, p.
397; and we have added his translation of the Danish ballad of _Rosmer Hafmand_, which exhibits a striking similarity to _Child Rowland_, from _Popular Ballads and Songs_, ii. 202. The tale of the _Red Etin_, as given in Chamber's _Pop. Rhymes of Scotland_, p. 56, has much resemblance to Jamieson's story, and, like it, is interspersed with verse.
The occurrence of the name Merlin is by no means a sufficient ground for connecting this tale, as Jamieson would do, with the cycle of King Arthur. For Merlin, as Grundtvig has remarked (_Folkeviser_, ii. 79), did not originally belong to that cycle, and again, his name seems to have been given in Scotland to any sort of wizard or prophet.
* * * * * ["King Arthur's sons o' merry Carlisle] Were playing at the ba';
And there was their sister Burd Ellen, I' the mids amang them a'.
"Child Rowland kick'd it wi' his foot, 5 And keppit it wi' his knee;
And ay, as he play'd out o'er them a', O'er the kirk he gar'd it flee.
"Burd Ellen round about the isle To seek the ba' is gane; 10 But they bade lang and ay langer, And she camena back again.
"They sought her east, they sought her west, They sought her up and down;
And wae were the hearts [in merry Carlisle,] 15 For she was nae gait found!"
At last her eldest brother went to the Warluck Merlin, (_Myrddin Wyldt_,) and asked if he knew where his sister, the fair Burd Ellen, was. "The fair Burd Ellen," said the Warluck Merlin, "is carried away by the fairies, and is now in the castle of the king of Elfland; and it were too bold an undertaking for the stoutest knight in Christendom to bring her back." "Is it possible to bring her back?" said her brother, "and I will do it, or perish in the attempt." "Possible indeed it is," said the Warluck Merlin; "but woe to the man or mother's son who attempts it, if he is not well instructed beforehand of what he is to do."
Influenced no less by the glory of such an enterprise, than by the desire of rescuing his sister, the brother of the fair Burd Ellen resolved to undertake the adventure; and after proper instructions from Merlin, (which he failed in observing,) he set out on his perilous expedition.
"But they bade lang and ay langer, Wi' dout and mickle maen;
And wae were the hearts [in merry Carlisle,] For he camena back again." 20 The second brother in like manner set out; but failed in observing the instructions of the Warluck Merlin; and "They bade lang and ay langer, Wi' mickle dout and maen;
And wae were the hearts [in merry Carlisle,] For he camena back again."
Child Rowland, the youngest brother of the fair Burd Ellen, then resolved to go; but was strenuously opposed by the good queen, [Gwenevra,] who was afraid of losing all her children.
At last the good queen [Gwenevra] gave him her consent and her blessing; he girt on (in great form, and with all due solemnity of sacerdotal consecration,) his father's good _claymore_, [Excalibar,] that never struck in vain, and repaired to the cave of the Warluck Merlin. The Warluck Merlin gave him all necessary instructions for his journey and conduct, the most important of which were, that he should kill every person he met with after entering the land of Fairy, and should neither eat nor drink of what was offered him in that country, whatever his hunger or thirst might be; for if he tasted or touched in Elfland, he must remain in the power of the Elves, and never see _middle eard_ again.
So Child Rowland set out on his journey, and travelled "on and ay farther on," till he came to where (as he had been forewarned by the Warluck Merlin,) he found the king of Elfland's horse-herd feeding his horses.
"Canst thou tell me," said Child Rowland to the horse-herd, "where the king of Elfland's castle is?"--"I cannot tell thee," said the horse-herd; "but go on a little farther, and thou wilt come to the cow-herd, and he, perhaps, may tell thee." So Child Rowland drew the good claymore, [Excalibar,] that never struck in vain, and hewed off the head of the horse-herd. Child Rowland then went on a little farther, till he came to the king of Elfland's cow-herd, who was feeding his cows. "Canst thou tell me," said Child Rowland to the cow-herd, "where the king of Elfland's castle is?"--"I cannot tell thee," said the cow-herd; "but go on a little farther, and thou wilt come to the sheep-herd, and he perhaps may tell thee." So Child Rowland drew the good claymore, [Excalibar,] that never struck in vain, and hewed off the head of the cow-herd. He then went on a little farther, till he came to the sheep-herd. * * * * [_The sheep-herd, goat-herd, and swine-herd are all, each in his turn, served in the same manner; and lastly he is referred to the hen-wife._] "Go on yet a little farther," said the hen-wife, "till thou come to a round green hill surrounded with rings (_terraces_) from the bottom to the top; go round it three times _widershins_, and every time say, "Open, door! open, door! and let me come in; and the third time the door will open, and you may go in." So Child Rowland drew the good claymore, [Excalibar,] that never struck in vain, and hewed off the head of the hen-wife. Then went he three times _widershins_ round the green hill, crying, "Open, door! open, door! and let me come in;" and the third time the door opened, and he went in.
It immediately closed behind him; and he proceeded through a long passage, where the air was soft and agreeably warm like a May evening, as is all the air of Elfland. The light was a sort of twilight or gloaming; but there were neither windows nor candles, and he knew not whence it came, if it was not from the walls and roof, which were rough, and arched like a grotto, and composed of a clear transparent rock, incrusted with _sheeps-silver_ and spar, and various bright stones. At last he came to two wide and lofty folding-doors, which stood a-jar. He opened them, and entered a large and spacious hall, whose richness and brilliance no tongue can tell. It seemed to extend the whole length and height of the hill. The superb Gothic pillars by which the roof was supported, were so large and so lofty, (said my seannachy,) that the pillars of the Chanry Kirk,[D] or of Pluscardin Abbey, are no more to be compared to them, than the Knock of Alves is to be compared to Balrinnes or Ben-a-chi. They were of gold and silver, and were fretted like the west window of the Chanry Kirk, with wreaths of flowers composed of diamonds and precious stones of all manner of beautiful colors. The key-stones of the arches above, instead of coats of arms and other devices, were ornamented with clusters of diamonds in the same manner. And from the middle of the roof, where the principal arches met, was hung by a gold chain, an immense lamp of one hollowed pearl, perfectly transparent, in the midst of which was suspended a large carbuncle, that by the power of magic continually turned round, and shed over all the hall a clear and mild light like the setting sun; but the hall was so large, and these dazzling objects so far removed, that their blended radiance cast no more than a pleasing lustre, and excited no more than agreeable sensations in the eyes of Child Rowland.
[D] The cathedral of Elgin naturally enough furnished similes to a man who had never in his life been twenty miles distant from it.
The furniture of the hall was suitable to its architecture; and at the farther end, under a splendid canopy, seated on a gorgeous sofa of velvet, silk, and gold, and "kembing her yellow hair wi' a silver kemb,"
"There was his sister burd Ellen; 25 She stood up him before."
Says, "'God rue on thee, poor luckless fode!
What has thou to do here?
"'And hear ye this, my youngest brither, Why badena ye at hame? 30 Had ye a hundur and thousand lives, Ye canna brook ane o' them.
"'And sit thou down; and wae, O wae That ever thou was born;
For come the King o' Elfland in, 35 Thy leccam is forlorn!'"
A long conversation then takes place; Child Rowland tells her the news [of merry Carlisle,] and of his own expedition; and concludes with the observation, that, after this long and fatiguing journey to the castle of the king of Elfland, he is _very hungry_.
Burd Ellen looked wistfully and mournfully at him, and shook her head, but said nothing. Acting under the influence of a magic which she could not resist, she arose, and brought him a golden bowl full of bread and milk, which she presented to him with the same timid, tender, and anxious expression of solicitude.
Remembering the instructions of the Warluck Merlin, "Burd Ellen," said Child Rowland, "I will neither taste nor touch till I have set thee free!" Immediately the folding-doors burst open with tremendous violence, and in came the king of Elfland, "With '_fi_, _fi_, _fo_, and _fum_!
I smell the blood of a Christian man!
Be he dead, be he living, wi' my brand I'll clash his harns frae his harn-pan!'" 40 "Strike, then, Bogle of Hell, if thou darest!" exclaimed the undaunted Child Rowland, starting up, and drawing the good claymore, [Excalibar,] that never struck in vain.
A furious combat ensued, and the king of Elfland was felled to the ground; but Child Rowland spared him on condition that he should restore to him his two brothers, who lay in a trance in a corner of the hall, and his sister, the fair burd Ellen. The king of Elfland then produced a small crystal phial, containing a bright red liquor, with which he anointed the lips, nostrils, eye-lids, ears, and finger-ends of the two young men, who immediately awoke as from a profound sleep, during which their souls had quitted their bodies, and they had seen, &c., &c., &c. So they all four returned in triumph to [merry Carlisle.] Such was the rude outline of the romance of Child Rowland, as it was told to me when I was about seven or eight years old, by a country tailor then at work in my father's house. He was an ignorant and dull good sort of honest man, who seemed never to have questioned the truth of what he related. Where the _et caeteras_ are put down, many curious particulars have been omitted, because I was afraid of being deceived by my memory, and substituting one thing for another. It is right also to admonish the reader, that the Warluck Merlin, Child Rowland, and Burd Ellen, were the only _names_ introduced in _his_ recitation; and that the others, inclosed within brackets, are assumed upon the authority of the locality given to the story by the mention of _Merlin_. In every other respect I have been as faithful as possible.
ROSMER HAFMAND, OR, THE MER-MAN ROSMER.
The ballad of _Rosmer_ is found in Danish, Swedish, Faroish, and Norse. All the questions bearing upon its origin, and the relations of the various _forms_ in which the story exists, are amply discussed by Grundtvig, vol. ii. p. 72. Three versions of the Danish ballad are given by Vedel, all of which Jamieson has translated. The following is No. 31 in Abrahamson.
There dwalls a lady in Danmarck, Lady Hillers lyle men her ca';
And she's gar'd bigg a new castell, That shines o'er Danmarck a'.
Her dochter was stown awa frae her; 5 She sought for her wide-whare;
But the mair she sought, and the less she fand,-- That wirks her sorrow and care.
And she's gar'd bigg a new ship, Wi' vanes o' flaming goud, 10 Wi' mony a knight and mariner, Sae stark in need bestow'd.
She's followed her sons down to the strand, That chaste and noble fre;
And wull and waif for eight lang years 15 They sail'd upon the sea.
And eight years wull and waif they sail'd, O' months that seem'd sae lang;
Syne they sail'd afore a high castell, And to the land can gang. 20 And the young lady Svane lyle, In the bower that was the best, Says, "Wharfrae cam thir frem swains, Wi' us this night to guest?"
Then up and spak her youngest brither, 25 Sae wisely ay spak he;
"We are a widow's three poor sons, Lang wilder'd on the sea.
"In Danmarck were we born and bred, Lady Hillers lyle was our mither; 30 Our sister frae us was stown awa, We findna whare or whither."
"In Danmarck were ye born and bred?
Was Lady Hillers your mither?
I can nae langer heal frae thee, 35 Thou art my youngest brither.
"And hear ye this, my youngest brither:
Why bade na ye at hame?
Had ye a hunder and thousand lives, Ye canna brook ane o' them." 40 She's set him in the weiest nook She in the house can meet;
She's bidden him for the high God's sake Nouther to laugh ne greet.
Rosmer hame frae Zealand came, 45 And he took on to bann:
"I smell fu' weel, by my right hand, That here is a Christian man."
"There flew a bird out o'er the house, Wi' a man's bane in his mouth; 50 He coost it in, and I cast it out, As fast as e'er I couth."
But wilyly she can Rosmer win;
And clapping him tenderly, "It's here is come my sister-son;-- 55 Gin I lose him, I'll die.
"It's here is come, my sister-son, Frae baith our fathers' land;
And I ha'e pledged him faith and troth, That ye will not him bann." 60 "And is he come, thy sister-son, Frae thy father's land to thee?
Then I will swear my highest aith, He's dree nae skaith frae me."
'Twas then the high king Rosmer, 65 He ca'd on younkers twae:
"Ye bid proud Svane lyle's sister-son To the chalmer afore me gae."
It was Svane lyle's sister-son, Whan afore Rosmer he wan, 70 His heart it quook, and his body shook, Sae fley'd, he scarce dow stand.
Sae Rosmer took her sister-son, Set him upon his knee;
He clappit him sae luifsomely, 75 He turned baith blue and blae.
And up and spak she, Svane lyle;
"Sir Rosmer, ye're nae to learn That your ten fingers arena sma, To clap sae little a bairn." 80 There was he till, the fifthen year, He green'd for hame and land:
"Help me now, sister Svane lyle, To be set on the white sand."
It was proud Lady Svane lyle, 85 Afore Rosmer can stand:
"This younker sae lang in the sea has been, He greens for hame and land."
"Gin the younker sae lang in the sea has been, And greens for hame and land, 90 Then I'll gie him a kist wi' goud, Sae fitting till his hand."
"And will ye gi'e him a kist wi' goud, Sae fitting till his hand?
Then hear ye, my noble heartis dear, 95 Ye bear them baith to land."
Then wrought proud Lady Svane lyle What Rosmer little wist;
For she's tane out the goud sae red, And laid hersel i' the kist. 100 He's ta'en the man upon his back;
The kist in his mouth took he;
And he has gane the lang way up Frae the bottom o' the sea.
"Now I ha'e borne thee to the land; 105 Thou seest baith sun and moon;
Namena Lady Svane for thy highest God, I beg thee as a boon."
Rosmer sprang i' the saut sea out, And jawp'd it up i' the sky; 110 But whan he cam till the castell in, Nae Svane lyle could he spy.
Whan he came till the castell in, His dearest awa was gane;
Like wood he sprang the castell about, 115 On the rock o' the black flintstane.
Glad they were in proud Hillers lyle's house, Wi' welcome joy and glee;
Hame to their friends her bairns were come, That had lang been in the sea. 120 TAM-A-LINE, THE ELFIN KNIGHT. (See page 114.) From _Scottish Traditionary Versions of Ancient Ballads_, Percy Society, xvii. p. 11.
Take warnin', a' ye ladyes fair, That wear gowd on your hair;
Come never unto Charter-woods, For Tam-a-line he's there.
Even about that knicht's middle 5 O' siller bells are nine;
Nae ane comes to Charter-woods, And a may returns agen.
Ladye Margaret sits in her bouir door, Sewing at her silken seam; 10 And she lang'd to gang to Charter woods, To pou the roses green.
She hadna pou'd a rose, a rose, Nor braken a branch but ane, Till by it came him true Tam-a-line, 15 Says, "Layde, lat alane.
"O why pou ye the rose, the rose?
Or why brake ye the tree?
Or why come ye to Charter-woods, Without leave ask'd of me?" 20 "I will pou the rose, the rose, And I will brake the tree;
Charter-woods are a' my ain, I'll ask nae leave o' thee."
He's taen her by the milk-white hand, 25 And by the grass-green sleeve;
And laid her low on gude green wood, At her he spier'd nae leave.
When he had got his will o' her, His will as he had ta'en, 30 He's ta'en her by the middle sma', Set her to feet again.
She turn'd her richt and round about, To spier her true love's name, But naething heard she, nor naething saw, 35 As a' the woods grew dim.
Seven days she tarried there, Saw neither sun nor muin;
At length, by a sma' glimmerin' licht, Came thro' the wood her lane. 40 When she came to her father's court, Was fine as ony queen;
But when eight months were past and gane, Got on the gown o' green.
Then out it speaks an eldren knicht, 45 As he stood at the yett;
"Our king's dochter, she gaes wi' bairn, And we'll get a' the wyte."
"O haud your tongue, ye eldren man, And bring me not to shame; 50 Although that I do gang wi' bairn, Yese naeways get the blame.
"Were my love but an earthly man, As he's an elfin knicht, I wadna gie my ain true luve, 55 For a' that's in my sicht."
Then out it speaks her brither dear, He meant to do her harm, "There is an herb in Charter-woods Will twine you an' the bairn." 60 She's taen her mantle her about, Her coiffer by the band;
And she is on to Charter-woods, As fast as she coud gang.
She hadna poud a rose, a rose, 65 Nor braken a branch but ane, Till by it came him, Tam-a-Line, Says, "Ladye, lat alane."
"O! why pou ye the pile, Margaret, The pile o' the gravil green, 70 For to destroy the bonny bairn That we got us between?
"O! why pou ye the pile, Margaret, The pile o' the gravil gray, For to destroy the bonny bairn 75 That we got in our play?
"For if it be a knave bairn, He's heir o' a' my land;
But if it be a lass bairn, In red gowd she shall gang." 80 "If my luve were an earthly man, As he's an elfin grey, I coud gang bound, luve, for your sake, A twalmonth and a day."
"Indeed your luve's an earthly man, 85 The same as well as thee;
And lang I've haunted Charter-woods, A' for your fair bodie."
"O! tell me, tell me, Tam-a-Line, O! tell, an' tell me true; 90 Tell me this nicht, an' mak' nae lee, What pedigree are you?"
"O! I hae been at gude church-door, An' I've got christendom;
I'm the Earl o' Forbes' eldest son, 95 An' heir ower a' his land.
"When I was young, o' three years old, Muckle was made o' me;
My stepmither put on my claithes, An' ill, ill, sained she me. 100 "Ae fatal morning I gaed out, Dreading nae injurie;
And thinking lang, fell soun asleep, Beneath an apple tree.
"Then by it came the Elfin Queen, 105 And laid her hand on me;
And from that time since e'er I mind, I've been in her companie.
"O Elfin it's a bonny place, In it fain wad I dwell; 110 But aye at ilka seven years' end, They pay a tiend to hell, And I'm sae fou o' flesh an blude, I'm sair fear'd for mysell."
"O tell me, tell me, Tam-a-Line, 115 O tell, an' tell me true;
Tell me this nicht, an' mak' nae lee, What way I'll borrow you?"
"The morn is Hallowe'en nicht, The Elfin court will ride, 120 Through England, and thro' a' Scotland, And through the warld wide.
"O they begin at sky sett in, Ride a' the evenin' tide;
And she that will her true love borrow, 125 At Miles-cross will him bide.
"Ye'll do ye down to Miles-cross, Between twall hours and ane;
And full your hands o' holie water, And cast your compass roun'. 130 "Then the first ane court that comes you till, Is published king and queen;
The neist ane court that comes you till, It is maidens mony ane.
"The neist ane court that comes you till, 135 Is footmen, grooms, and squires;
The neist ane court that comes you till, Is knichts; and I'll be there.
"I Tam-a-Line, on milk-white steed, A gowd star on my crown; 140 Because I was an earthly knicht, Got that for a renown.
"And out at my steed's right nostril, He'll breathe a fiery flame;
Ye'll loot you low, and sain yoursel, 145 And ye'll be busy then.
"Ye'll tak' my horse then by the head, And lat the bridal fa';
The Queen o' Elfin she'll cry out, 'True Tam-a-Line's awa'.' 150 "Then I'll appear into your arms Like the wolf that ne'er wad tame;
Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae, Case we ne'er meet again.
"Then I'll appear into your arms 155 Like fire that burns sae bauld;
Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae, I'll be as iron cauld.
"Then I'll appear into your arms Like the adder an' the snake; 160 Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae, I am your warld's maike.
"Then I'll appear into your arms Like to the deer sae wild;
Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae, 165 And I'll father your child.
"And I'll appear into your arms Like to a silken string;
Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae, Till ye see the fair mornin'. 170 "And I'll appear into your arms Like to a naked man;
Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae, And wi' you I'll gae hame."
Then she has done her to Miles-cross, 175 Between twal hours an' ane;
And filled her hands o' holie water, And kiest her compass roun'.
The first ane court that came her till, Was published king and queen; 180 The niest ane court that came her till, Was maidens mony ane.
The niest ane court that came her till, Was footmen, grooms, and squires;
The niest ane court that came her till, 185 Was knichts; and he was there!
True Tam-a-Line, on milk-white steed, A gowd star on his crown;
Because he was an earthly man, Got that for a renown. 190 And out at the steed's right nostril, He breath'd a fiery flame;
She loots her low, an' sains hersel, And she was busy then.
She's taen the horse then by the head, 195 And loot the bridle fa';
The Queen o' Elfin she cried out,-- "True Tam-a-Line's awa'."
"Stay still, true Tam-a-Line," she says, "Till I pay you your fee;" 200 "His father wants not lands nor rents, He'll ask nae fee frae thee."
"Gin I had kent yestreen, yestreen, What I ken weel the day, I shou'd hae taen your fu' fause heart, 205 Gien you a heart o' clay."
Then he appeared into her arms Like the wolf that ne'er wad tame;
She held him fast, lat him not gae, Case they ne'er met again. 210 Then he appeared into her arms Like the fire burning bauld;
She held him fast, lat him not gae, He was as iron cauld.
And he appeared into her arms 215 Like the adder an' the snake;
She held him fast, lat him not gae, He was her warld's maike.
And he appeared into her arms Like to the deer sae wild; 220 She held him fast, lat him not gae, He's father o' her child.
And he appeared into her arms Like to a silken string;
She held him fast, lat him not gae, 225 Till she saw fair mornin'.
And he appeared into her arms Like to a naked man;
She held him fast, lat him not gae, And wi' her he's gane hame. 230 These news hae reach'd thro' a' Scotland, And far ayont the Tay, That ladye Margaret, our king's dochter, That nicht had gain'd her prey.
She borrowed her love at mirk midnicht, 235 Bare her young son ere day;
And though ye'd search the warld wide, Ye'll nae find sic a may.
TOM LINN. (See p. 114.) This fragment was taken down from the recitation of an old woman.
Maidment's _New Book of Old Ballads_, p. 54.
O all you ladies young and gay, Who are so sweet and fair, Do not go into Chaster's wood, For Tomlinn will be there.
* * * * * Fair Margaret sat in her bonny bower, 5 Sewing her silken seam, And wished to be in Chaster's wood, Among the leaves so green.
She let the seam fall to her foot, The needle to her toe, 10 And she has gone to Chaster's wood, As fast as she could go.
When she began to pull the flowers;
She pull'd both red and green;
Then by did come, and by did go, 15 Said, "Fair maid, let abene!
"O why pluck you the flowers, lady, Or why climb you the tree?
Or why come ye to Chaster's wood, Without the leave of me?" 20 "O I will pull the flowers," she said, "Or I will break the tree;
For Chaster's wood it is my own, I'll ask no leave at thee."
He took her by the milk-white hand, 25 And by the grass-green sleeve;
And laid her down upon the flowers, At her he ask'd no leave.
The lady blush'd and sourly frown'd, And she did think great shame; 30 Says, "If you are a gentleman, You will tell me your name."
"First they call me Jack," he said, "And then they call'd me John;
But since I liv'd in the Fairy court, 35 Tomlinn has always been my name.
"So do not pluck that flower, lady, That has these pimples gray;
They would destroy the bonny babe That we've gotten in our play." 40 "O tell to me, Tomlinn," she said, "And tell it to me soon;
Was you ever at a good church door, Or got you christendom?"
"O I have been at good church door, 45 And oft her yetts within;
I was the Laird of Foulis's son, The heir of all his land.
"But it fell once upon a day, As hunting I did ride, 50 As I rode east and west yon hill, Then woe did me betide.
"O drowsy, drowsy as I was, Dead sleep upon me fell;
The Queen of Fairies she was there, 55 And took me to hersel.
"The morn at even is Hallowe'en, Our Fairy court will ride, Through England and through Scotland both, Through all the world wide; 60 And if that ye would me borrow, At Rides Cross ye may bide.
"You may go into the Miles Moss, Between twelve hours and one;
Take holy water in your hand, 65 And cast a compass round.
"The first court that comes along, You'll let them all pass by;
The next court that comes along, Salute them reverently. 70 "The next court that comes along, Is clad in robes of green;
And it's the head court of them all, For in it rides the Queen.
"And I upon a milk-white steed, 75 With a gold star in my crown;
Because I am an earthly man, I'm next the Queen in renown.
"Then seize upon me with a spring, Then to the ground I'll fa'; 80 And then you'll hear a rueful cry, That Tomlinn is awa'.
"Then I'll grow in your arms two, Like to a savage wild;
But hold me fast, let me not go, 85 I'm father of your child.
"I'll grow into your arms two Like an adder, or a snake;
But hold me fast, let me not go, I'll be your earthly maik. 90 "I'll grow into your arms two Like ice on frozen lake;
But hold me fast, let me not go, Or from your goupen break.
"I'll grow into your arms two, 95 Like iron in strong fire;
But hold me fast, let me not go, Then you'll have your desire."
And its next night into Miles Moss, Fair Margaret has gone; 100 When lo she stands beside Rides Cross, Between twelve hours and one.
There's holy water in her hand, She casts a compass round;
And presently a Fairy band 105 Comes riding o'er the mound.
* * * * * This seems to be the most appropriate connection for a short fragment from Maidment's _North Countrie Garland_, (p. 21.) It was taken down from the recitation of a lady who had heard it sung in her childhood.
BURD ELLEN AND YOUNG TAMLANE.
Burd Ellen sits in the bower windowe, _With a double laddy double, and for the double dow_, Twisting the red silk and the blue, _With the double rose and the May-hay_.
And whiles she twisted, and whiles she twan, 5 _With a double_, &c.
And whiles the tears fell down amang, _With the double_, &c.
Till once there by cam young Tamlane, _With a double_, &c. 10 "Come light, oh light, and rock your young son!"
_With the double_, &c.
"If you winna rock him, you may let him rair, _With a double_, &c.
For I hae rockit my share and mair." 15 _With the double_, &c.
* * * * * Young Tamlane to the seas he's gane, _With a double laddy double, and for the double dow,_ And a' women's curse in his company's gane, _With the double rose and the May-hay_. 20 ALS Y YOD ON AY MOUNDAY. (See p. 126.) In the manuscript from which these verses are taken, they form the preface to a long strain of incomprehensible prophecies of the same description as those which are appended to _Thomas of Ersyldoune_.
Whether the two portions belong together, or not, (and it will be seen that they are ill enough joined,) the first alone requires to be cited here for the purpose of comparison with the _Wee Wee Man_. The whole piece has been twice printed, first by Finlay, in his _Scottish Ballads_, (ii. 163,) and afterwards, by a person who was not aware that he had been anticipated, in the _Retrospective Review_, Second Series, vol. ii. p. 326. Both texts are in places nearly unintelligible, and are evidently full of errors, part of which we must ascribe to the incompetency of the editors. Finlay's is here adopted as on the whole the best, but it has received a few corrections from the other, and one or two conjectural emendations.
Als y yod on ay Mounday Bytwene Wyltinden and Wall, The ane after brade way, Ay litel man y mette with alle, The leste yat ever y, sathe to say, 5 Oither in bowr, oither in halle;
His robe was noither grene na gray, Bot alle yt was of riche palle.
On me he cald, and bad me bide;
Well stille y stode ay litel space; 10 Fra Lanchestre the parke syde Yeen he come, wel fair his pase.
He hailsed me with mikel pride;
Ic haved wel mykel ferly wat he was;
I saide,--"Wel mote the betyde, 15 That litel man with large face."
I beheld that litel man Bi the strete als we gon gae;
His berd was syde ay large span, And glided als the fether of pae; 20 His heved was wyte als ony swan, His hegehen was gret and grai als so;
Brues lange, wel I the can Merk it to fize inches and mae.
Armes scort, for sothe I saye, 25 Ay span seemed thaem to bee:
Handes brade vytouten nay, And fingeres lange, he scheued me.
Ay stane he tok op thar it lay, And castit forth that I moth see; 30 Ay merk-soot of large way Bifore me strides he castit three.
Wel stille I stod als did the stane, To loke him on thouth me nouth lang;
His robe was alle gold begane, 35 Wel craftelike[L36] maked, I understande;
Botones asurd, everlk ane, Fra his elbouthe ontil his hande;
Erdelik[L39] man was he nane;
That in myn hert ich onderstande. 40 Til him I sayde ful sone on ane, For forthirmar I wald him fraine, "Gladli wald[L43] I wit thi name, And I wist wat me mouthe gaine;
Thou ert so litel of fleshe and bane, 45 And so mikel of mith and mayne, War vones thou, litel man, at hame?
Wit of thee I wald ful faine."
"Thoth I be litel and lith, Am y noth wytouten wane; 50 Ferli frained thou wat hi hith, That[L52] thou salt noth wit my name;
My wonige stede ful wel es dyght,[L53] Nou sone thou salt se at hame."
Til him I sayde, "For Godes mith, 55 Let me forth myn erand gane."
"The thar noth of thin erand lette, Thouth thou come ay stonde wit me, Forther salt thou noth bi sette, Bi miles twa noyther bi three." 60 Na linger durst I for him lette, But forth y funded wyt that free;
Stintid vs brok no beck;
Ferlich me thouth hu so mouth bee.
He vent forth, als y you say, 65 In at ay yate, y vnderstande;
In til ay yate wvndouten nay;
It to se thouth me nouth[L68] lang.
The bankers on the binkes lay, And fair lordes sett y fonde; 70 In ilka ay hirn y herd ay lay, And leuedys soth meloude sange.
[Here there seems to be a break, and a new start made, with a tale told not on a _Monday_, but on a _Wednesday_.] Lithe, bothe zonge and alde:
Of ay worde y will you saye, Ay litel tale that me was tald Erli on ay Wedenesdaye.
A mody barn, that was ful bald, My friend that y frained aye, Al my gesing he me tald, And galid me als we went bi waye.
"Miri man, that es so wyth, Of ay thing gif me answere:
For him that mensked man wyt mith, Wat sal worth of this were?" &c.
Finlay, 36, crustlike.
39, Clidelik.
43, Glalli wild.
52, That, qy. Yat?; with.
53, dygh.
68, south.
THE ELPHIN KNIGHT. (See p. 128.) "The following transcript is a literal copy from the original in the Pepysian library, Cambridge." Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, Appendix, p.
i.
"A Proper New Ballad, entituled, _The Wind hath blown my Plaid away, or, A Discourse betwixt a young Maid and the Elphin-Knight_; To be sung with its own pleasant New Tune."
The Elphin Knight site on yon hill, _Ba, ba, ba, lilli ba,_ He blowes his horn both loud and shril, _The wind hath blown my plaid awa_.
He blowes it East, he blowes it West, 5 _Ba, ba_, &c.
He blowes it where he lyketh best.
_The wind_, &c.
"I wish that horn were in my kist, _Ba, ba_, &c. 10 Yea, and the knight in my armes two."
_The wind_, &c.
She had no sooner these words said, _Ba, ba_, &c.
When that the knight came to her bed. 15 _The wind_, &c.
"Thou art over young a maid," quoth he, _Ba, ba_, &c.
"Married with me thou il wouldst be."
_The wind_, &c. 20 "I have a sister younger than I, _Ba, ba_, &c.
And she was married yesterday."
_The wind_, &c.
"Married with me if thou wouldst be, 25 _Ba, ba_, &c.
A courtesie thou must do to me.
_The wind_, &c.
"For thou must shape a sark to me, _Ba, ba_, &c. 30 Without any cut or heme," quoth he.
_The wind_, &c.
"Thou must shape it needle- and sheerlesse, _Ba, ba_, &c.
And also sue it needle-threedlesse." 35 _The wind_, &c.
"If that piece of courtesie I do to thee, _Ba, ba_, &c.
Another thou must do to me.
_The wind_, &c. 40 "I have an aiker of good ley-land, _Ba, ba_, &c.
Which lyeth low by yon sea-strand.
_The wind_, &c.
"For thou must cure it with thy horn, 45 _Ba, ba_, &c.
So thou must sow it with thy corn.
_The wind_, &c.
"And bigg a cart of stone and lyme, _Ba, ba_, &c. 50 Robin Redbreast he must trail it hame.
_The wind_, &c.
"Thou must barn it in a mouse-holl, _Ba, ba_, &c.
And thrash it into thy shoes' soll. 55 _The wind_, &c.
"And thou must winnow it in thy looff, _Ba, ba_, &c.
And also seck it in thy glove.
_The wind_, &c. 60 "For thou must bring it over the sea, _Ba, ba_, &c.
And thou must bring it dry home to me.
_The wind_, &c.
"When thou hast gotten thy turns well done, 65 _Ba, ba_, &c.
Then come to me and get thy sark then.
_The wind_, &c."
"I'l not quite my plaid for my life, _Ba, ba_, &c. 70 It haps my seven bairns and my wife.
_The wind shall not blow my plaid awa._"
"My maidenhead I'l then keep still, _Ba, ba_, &c.
Let the Elphin Knight do what he will. 75 _The wind's not blown my plaid awa._"
"_My plaid awa, my plaid awa, And o'er the hill and far awa, And far awa, to Norrowa, My plaid shall not be blown awa._"
THE LAIDLEY WORM OF SPINDLESTON-HEUGH. See p. 137.
"A song above 500 years old, made by the old mountain-bard, Duncan Frasier, living on Cheviot, A.D. 1270."
This ballad, first published in Hutchinson's _History of Northumberland_, was the composition of Mr. Robert Lambe, vicar of Norham. Several stanzas are, however, adopted from some ancient tale.
It has been often printed, and is now taken from Ritson's _Northumberland Garland_.
The similar story of _The Worme of Lambton_, versified by the Rev. J.
Watson (compare _Ormekampen_ and the cognate legends, Grundtvig, i.
343, also vol. viii. p. 128, of this collection), may be seen in Richardson's _Borderer's Table-Book_, viii. 129, or in Moore's _Pictorial Book of Ancient Ballad Poetry_, page 784. With the tale of the _Lambton Worm of Durham_ agrees in many particulars that of the _Worm of Linton_ in Roxburghshire. (See Scott's introduction to _Kempion_, and Sir C. Sharpe's _Bishopric Garland_, p. 21.) It is highly probable that the mere coincidence of sound with _Linden-Worm_ caused this last place to be selected as the scene of such a story.
The king is gone from Bambrough Castle, Long may the princess mourn;
Long may she stand on the castle wall, Looking for his return.
She has knotted the keys upon a string, 5 And with her she has them ta'en, She has cast them o'er her left shoulder, And to the gate she is gane.
She tripped out, she tripped in, She tript into the yard; 10 But it was more for the king's sake, Than for the queen's regard.
It fell out on a day, the king Brought the queen with him home;
And all the lords in our country 15 To welcome them did come.
"O welcome father!" the lady cries, "Unto your halls and bowers;
And so are you, my step-mother, For all that's here is yours." 20 A lord said, wondering while she spake,[L21] "This princess of the North Surpasses all of female kind In beauty, and in worth."
The envious queen replied, "At least, 25 You might have excepted me;
In a few hours, I will her bring Down to a low degree.
"I will her liken to a laidley worm, That warps about the stone, 30 And not till Childy Wynd[L31] comes back, Shall she again be won."
The princess stood at the bower door Laughing, who could her blame?
But e'er the next day's sun went down, 35 A long worm she became.
For seven miles east, and seven miles west, And seven miles north, and south, No blade of grass or corn could grow, So venomous was her mouth. 40 The milk of seven stately cows (It was costly her to keep) Was brought her daily, which she drank Before she went to sleep.
At this day may be seen the cave 45 Which held her folded up, And the stone trough, the very same Out of which she did sup.
Word went east, and word went west, And word is gone over the sea, 50 That a laidley worm in Spindleston-Heughs Would ruin the North Country.
Word went east, and word went west, And over the sea did go;
The Child of Wynd got wit of it, 55 Which filled his heart with woe.
He called straight his merry men all, They thirty were and three:
"I wish I were at Spindleston, This desperate worm to see. 60 "We have no time now here to waste, Hence quickly let us sail:
My only sister Margaret, Something, I fear, doth ail."
They built a ship without delay, 65 With masts of the rown tree, With flutring sails of silk so fine, And set her on the sea.
They went on board; the wind with speed, Blew them along the deep; 70 At length they spied an huge square tower On a rock high and steep.
The sea was smooth, the weather clear;
When they approached nigher, King Ida's castle they well knew, 75 And the banks of Bambroughshire.
The queen look'd out at her bower window, To see what she could see;
There she espied a gallant ship Sailing upon the sea. 80 When she beheld the silken sails, Full glancing in the sun, To sink the ship she sent[L83] away Her witch wives every one.
The spells were vain; the hags returned 85 To the queen in sorrowful mood, Crying that witches have no power Where there is rown-tree wood.
Her last effort, she sent a boat, Which in the haven lay, 90 With armed men to board the ship, But they were driven away.
The worm lept out, the worm lept down, She plaited round the stone;
And ay as the ship came to the land 95 She banged it off again.
The Child then ran out of her reach The ship on Budley-sand, And jumping into the shallow sea, Securely got to land. 100 And now he drew his berry-brown[L101] sword, And laid it on her head;
And swore, if she did harm to him, That he would strike her dead.
"O quit thy sword, and bend thy bow, 105 And give me kisses three;
For though I am a poisonous worm, No hurt I'll do to thee.
"O quit thy sword, and bend thy bow, And give me kisses three; 110 If I'm not won e'er the sun go down, Won I shall never be."
He quitted his sword, and bent his bow, He gave her kisses three;
She crept into a hole a worm, 115 But out stept a lady.
No clothing had this lady fine, To keep her from the cold;
He took his mantle from him about, And round her did it fold. 120 He has taken his mantle from him about, And in it he wrapt her in, And they are up to Bambrough castle, As fast as they can win.
His absence, and her serpent shape, 125 The king had long deplored;
He now rejoyced to see them both Again to him restored.
The queen they wanted, whom they found All pale, and sore afraid, 130 Because she knew her power must yield To Childy Wynd's, who said, "Woe be to thee, thou wicked witch;
An ill death mayest thou dee;
As thou my sister hast lik'ned, 135 So lik'ned shalt thou be.
"I will turn you into a toad, That on the ground doth wend;
And won, won shalt thou never be, Till this world hath an end." 140 Now on the sand near Ida's tower, She crawls a loathsome toad, And venom spits on every maid She meets upon her road.
The virgins all of Bambrough town 145 Will swear that they have seen This spiteful toad, of monstrous size, Whilst walking they have been.
All folks believe within the shire This story to be true, 150 And they all run to Spindleston, The cave and trough to view.
This fact now Duncan Frasier, Of Cheviot, sings in rhime, Lest Bambroughshire men should forget 155 Some part of it in time.
v. 21-28. Compare _Young Waters_, (iii. 90,) v. 21-28, and _Young Beichan and Susie Pye_, (iv. 7,) v. 118-124.
v. 31. Childy Wynd is obviously a corruption of Child Owain.
83, went.
101, berry-broad.
LORD DINGWALL. (See p. 152.) From Buchan's _Ancient Ballads and Songs of the North of Scotland_.
(i. 204.) We were sisters, sisters seven, _Bowing down, bowing down_;
The fairest women under heaven.
_And aye the birks a-bowing._ They kiest kevels them amang, Wha wou'd to the grenewood gang. 5 The kevels they gied thro' the ha', And on the youngest it did fa'.
Now she must to the grenewood gang, To pu' the nuts in grenewood hang.
She hadna tarried an hour but ane, Till she met wi' a highlan' groom. 10 He keeped her sae late and lang, Till the evening set, and birds they sang.
He ga'e to her at their parting, A chain o' gold, and gay gold ring:
And three locks o' his yellow hair: 15 Bade her keep them for evermair.
When six lang months were come and gane, A courtier to this lady came.
Lord Dingwall courted this lady gay, And so he set their wedding-day. 20 A little boy to the ha' was sent, To bring her horse was his intent.
As she was riding the way along, She began to make a heavy moan.
"What ails you, lady," the boy said, 25 "That ye seem sae dissatisfied?
"Are the bridle reins for you too strong?
Or the stirrups for you too long?"
"But, little boy, will ye tell me, The fashions that are in your countrie?" 30 "The fashions in our ha' I'll tell, And o' them a' I'll warn you well.
"When ye come in upon the floor, His mither will meet you wi' a golden chair.
"But be ye maid, or be ye nane, 35 Unto the high seat make ye boun.
"Lord Dingwall aft has been beguil'd, By girls whom young men hae defiled.
"He's cutted the paps frae their breast bane, And sent them back to their ain hame." 40 When she came in upon the floor, His mother met her wi' a golden chair.
But to the high seat she made her boun':
She knew that maiden she was nane.
When night was come, they went to bed, 45 And ower her breast his arm he laid.
He quickly jumped upon the floor, And said, "I've got a vile rank whore."
Unto his mother he made his moan, Says, "Mother dear, I am undone. 50 "Ye've aft tald, when I brought them hame, Whether they were maid or nane.
"I thought I'd gotten a maiden bright, I've gotten but a waefu' wight.
"I thought I'd gotten a maiden clear, 55 But gotten but a vile rank whore."
"When she came in upon the floor, I met her wi' a golden chair.
"But to the high seat she made her boun', Because a maiden she was nane." 60 "I wonder wha's tauld that gay ladie, The fashion into our countrie."
"It is your little boy I blame, Whom ye did send to bring her hame."
Then to the lady she did go, 65 And said, "O Lady, let me know "Who has defiled your fair bodie?
Ye're the first that has beguiled me."
"O we were sisters, sisters seven, The fairest women under heaven; 70 "And we kiest kevels us amang, Wha wou'd to the grenewood gang;
"For to pu' the finest flowers, To put around our summer bowers.
"I was the youngest o' them a', 75 The hardest fortune did me befa'.
"Unto the grenewood I did gang, And pu'd the nuts as they down hang.
"I hadna stay'd an hour but ane, Till I met wi' a highlan' groom. 80 "He keeped me sae late and lang, Till the evening set, and birds they sang.
"He gae to me at our parting, A chain of gold, and gay gold ring:
"And three locks o' his yellow hair: 85 Bade me keep them for evermair.
"Then for to show I make nae lie, Look ye my trunk, and ye will see."
Unto the trunk then she did go, To see if that were true or no. 90 And aye she sought, and aye she flang, Till these four things came to her hand.
Then she did to her ain son go, And said, "My son, ye'll let me know.
"Ye will tell to me this thing:-- 95 What did yo wi' my wedding-ring?"
"Mother dear, I'll tell nae lie:
I gave it to a gay ladie.
"I would gie a' my ha's and towers, I had this bird within my bowers." 100 "Keep well, keep well, your lands and strands, Ye hae that bird within your hands.
"Now, my son, to your bower ye'll go:
Comfort your ladie, she's full o' woe."
Now when nine months were come and gane, 105 The lady she brought hame a son.
It was written on his breast-bane, Lord Dingwall was his father's name.
He's ta'en his young son in his arms, And aye he prais'd his lovely charms. 110 And he has gi'em him kisses three, And doubled them ower to his ladie.
HYNDE ETIN. (See p. 179.) From Kinloch's _Ancient Scottish Ballads_, p. 228.
May Marg'ret stood in her bouer door, Kaiming doun her yellow hair;
She spied some nuts growin in the wud, And wish'd that she was there.
She has plaited her yellow locks 5 A little abune her bree;
And she has kilted her petticoats A little below her knee;
And she's aff to Mulberry wud, As fast as she could gae. 10 She had na pu'd a nut, a nut, A nut but barely ane, Till up started the Hynde Etin, Says, "Lady! let thae alane."
"Mulberry wuds are a' my ain; 15 My father gied them me, To sport and play when I thought lang;
And they sall na be tane by thee."
And ae she pu'd the tither berrie, Na thinking o' the skaith; 20 And said, "To wrang ye, Hynde Etin, I wad be unco laith."
But he has tane her by the yellow locks, And tied her till a tree, And said, "For slichting my commands, 25 An ill death shall ye dree."
He pu'd a tree out o' the wud, The biggest that was there;
And he howkit a cave monie fathoms deep, And put May Marg'ret there. 30 "Now rest ye there, ye saucie may;
My wuds are free for thee;
And gif I tak ye to mysell, The better ye'll like me."
Na rest, na rest May Marg'ret took, 35 Sleep she got never nane;
Her back lay on the cauld, cauld floor, Her head upon a stane.
"O tak me out," May Marg'ret cried, "O tak me hame to thee; 40 And I sall be your bounden page Until the day I dee."
He took her out o' the dungeon deep, And awa wi' him she's gane;
But sad was the day an earl's dochter 45 Gaed hame wi' Hynde Etin.
* * * * * It fell out ance upon a day, Hynde Etin's to the hunting gane;
And he has tane wi' him his eldest son, For to carry his game. 50 "O I wad ask you something, father, An ye wadna angry be;"-- "Ask on, ask on, my eldest son, Ask onie thing at me."
"My mother's cheeks are aft times weet, 55 Alas! they are seldom dry;"-- "Na wonder, na wonder, my eldest son, Tho' she should brast and die.
"For your mother was an earl's dochter, Of noble birth and fame; 60 And now she's wife o' Hynde Etin, Wha ne'er got christendame.
"But we'll shoot the laverock in the lift, The buntlin on the tree;
And ye'll tak them hame to your mother, 65 And see if she'll comforted be."
* * * * * "I wad ask ye something, mother, An' ye wadna angry be;"-- "Ask on, ask on, my eldest son, Ask onie thing at me." 70 "Your cheeks they are aft times weet, Alas! they're seldom dry;"-- "Na wonder, na wonder, my eldest son, Tho' I should brast and die.
"For I was ance an earl's dochter, 75 Of noble birth and fame;
And now I am the wife of Hynde Etin, Wha ne'er got christendame."
SIR OLUF AND THE ELF-KING'S DAUGHTER. (See p. 192.) This is a translation by Jamieson (_Popular Ballads and Songs_, i.
219), of the Danish _Elveskud_ (Abrahamson, i. 237). Lewis has given a version of the same in the _Tales of Wonder_, (No. 10.) The corresponding Swedish ballad, _The Elf-Woman and Sir Olof_ (Afzelius, iii. 165) is translated by Keightley, _Fairy Mythology_, p. 84. This ballad occurs also in Norse, Faroish, and Icelandic.
Of the same class are _Elfer Hill_, (from the Danish, Jamieson, i.
225; from the Swedish, Keightley, 86; through the German, _Tales of Wonder_, No. 6:) _Sir Olof in the Elve-Dance_, (Keightley, 82;
_Literature and Romance of Northern Europe_, by William and Mary Howitt, i. 269:) _The Merman and Marstig's Daughter_, (from the Danish, Jamieson, i. 210; _Tales of Wonder_, No. 11:) the Breton tale of _Lord Nann and the Korrigan_, (Keightley, 433:) three Slavic ballads referred to by Grundtvig, (_Elveskud_, ii. 111:) _Sir Peter of Stauffenbergh and the Mermaid_, (from the German, Jamieson, _Illustrations of Northern Antiquities_, 257,) and the well-known _Fischer_ of Goethe.
Sir Oluf the hend has ridden sae wide, All unto his bridal feast to bid.
And lightly the elves, sae feat and free, They dance all under the greenwood tree!
And there danced four, and there danced five; 5 The Elf-King's daughter she reekit bilive.
Her hand to Sir Oluf sae fair and free:
"O welcome, Sir Oluf, come dance wi' me!
"O welcome, Sir Oluf! now lat thy love gae, And tread wi' me in the dance sae gay." 10 "To dance wi' thee ne dare I, ne may;
The morn it is my bridal day."
"O come, Sir Oluf, and dance wi' me;
Twa buckskin boots I'll give to thee;
"Twa buckskin boots, that sit sae fair, 15 Wi' gilded spurs sae rich and rare.
"And hear ye, Sir Oluf! come dance wi' me;
And a silken sark I'll give to thee;
"A silken sark sae white and fine, That my mother bleached in the moonshine." 20 "I darena, I maunna come dance wi' thee;
For the morn my bridal day maun be."
"O hear ye, Sir Oluf! come dance wi' me, And a helmet o' goud I'll give to thee."
"A helmet o' goud I well may ha'e; 25 But dance wi' thee ne dare I, ne may."
"And winna thou dance, Sir Oluf, wi' me?
Then sickness and pain shall follow thee!"
She's smitten Sir Oluf--it strak to his heart;
He never before had kent sic a smart; 30 Then lifted him up on his ambler red;
"And now, Sir Oluf, ride hame to thy bride."
And whan he came till the castell yett, His mither she stood and leant thereat.
"O hear ye, Sir Oluf, my ain dear son, 35 Whareto is your lire sae blae and wan?"
"O well may my lire be wan and blae, For I ha'e been in the elf-womens' play."
"O hear ye, Sir Oluf, my son, my pride, And what shall I say to thy young bride?" 40 "Ye'll say, that I've ridden but into the wood, To prieve gin my horse and hounds are good."
Ear on the morn, whan night was gane, The bride she cam wi' the bridal train.
They skinked the mead, and they skinked the wine: 45 "O whare is Sir Oluf, bridegroom mine?"
"Sir Oluf has ridden but into the wood, To prieve gin his horse and hounds are good."
And she took up the scarlet red, And there lay Sir Oluf, and he was dead! 50 Ear on the morn, whan it was day, Three likes were ta'en frae the castle away;
Sir Oluf the leal, and his bride sae fair, And his mither, that died wi' sorrow and care.
And lightly the elves sae feat and free, 55 They dance all under the greenwood tree!
FRAGMENT OF THE DAEMON LOVER. (See p. 201.) (Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, p. 92.) "I have seven ships upon the sea, Laden with the finest gold, And mariners to wait us upon;-- All these you may behold.
"And I have shoes for my love's feet, 5 Beaten of the purest gold, And lined wi' the velvet soft, To keep my love's feet from the cold.
"O how do you love the ship," he said, "Or how do you love the sea? 10 And how do you love the bold mariners That wait upon thee and me?"
"O I do love the ship," she said, "And I do love the sea;
But woe be to the dim mariners, 15 That nowhere I can see."
They had not sailed a mile awa', Never a mile but one, When she began to weep and mourn, And to think on her little wee son. 20 "O hold your tongue, my dear," he said, "And let all your weeping abee, For I'll soon show to you how the lilies grow On the banks of Italy."
They had not sailed a mile awa', 25 Never a mile but two, Until she espied his cloven foot, From his gay robes sticking thro'.
They had not sailed a mile awa', Never a mile but three, 30 When dark, dark, grew his eerie looks, And raging grew the sea.
They had not sailed a mile awa', Never a mile but four, When the little wee ship ran round about, 35 And never was seen more!
CONSTANTINE AND ARETE. See p. 217.
We are indebted for the following recension of _Constantine and Arete_ to Mr. Sophocles of Harvard College. It is constructed from Fauriel's text, combined with a copy in Zambelios's [Grk: Aismata Demotika], and with a version taken down from the recitation of a Cretan woman. The translation is by the skilful hand of Professor Felton.
We may notice by the way that several versions of this piece are given by Tommaseo, in his _Canti Popolari Toscani_, etc. iii. 341.
[Grk:
Manna me tous ennia sou huious kai me te mia sou kore, Ten kore te monakribe ten polyagapemene, Ten eiches dodeka chronon k' helios den sou ten eide, 'S ta skoteina ten elouges, 's t' aphenga ten eplekes, 'S t' astre kai 's ton augerino to' ephkeianes ta sgoura tes. 5 He geitonia den exere pos eiches thygatera, Kai proxenia sou pherane apo te Babylone.
Hoi okto aderphoi den theloune, kai ho Kostantinos thelei;
"Dos tene, manna, dos tene ten 'Arete 's ta xena, Na 'cho k' ego paregoria 's te strata pou diabaino." 10 "Phrenimos eisai, Kostante, m' aschem' apilogethes;
An tyche pikra ge chara, poios tha mou tene phere?"
To theo tes banei engyte kai tous hagious martyrous, An tyche pikra ge chara na pae na tes ten phere;
Kai san ten epantrepsane ten Arete 's ta xena, 15 Erchetai chronos disephtos kai hoi ennia pethanan.
Emeine he manna monache san kalamia 's ton kampo.
'S ta ochto mnemata dernetai, 's ta ochto myrologaei, 'S tou Kostantinou to thaphtio anespa ta mallia tes;