The only ears that took the benefit of this speech were Edith's and Mr. Carleton's; Fleda's were deafened by the rush of feeling. She very little knew what she was holding. Mr.
Carleton stood with rather significant gravity, watching the effect of his prescription, while Edith beset her mother to know why the outside of the vinaigrette, being of gold, should make it do Fleda any more good; the disposing of which question effectually occupied Mrs. Evelyn's attention for some time.
"And, pray, how long is it since you took up the trade of a physician, Mr. Carleton?" said Constance.
"It is just about nine years, Miss Constance," he answered, gravely.
But that little reminder, slight as it was, overcame the small remnant of Fleda's self-command — the vinaigrette fell from her hands, and her face was hid in them; whatever became of pain, tears must flow.
"Forgive me," said Mr. Carleton, gently, bending down towards her, "for speaking when I should have been silent — Miss Evelyn, and Miss Constance, will you permit me to order that my patient be left in quiet."
And he took them away to Mrs. Evelyn's quarter, and kept them all three engaged in conversation, too busily to trouble Fleda with any attention, till she had had ample time to try the effect of the quiet and of the vinegar both. Then he went himself to look after her.
"Are you better?" said he, bending down, and speaking low.
Fleda opened her eyes and gave him, what a look! — of grateful feeling. She did not know the half that was in it; but he did.
That she was better, was a very small item.
"Ready for the coffee?" said he, smiling.
"Oh, no," whispered Fleda — "It don't matter about that — never mind the coffee!"
But he went back with his usual calmness to Mrs. Evelyn, and begged that she would have the goodness to order a cup of rather strong coffee to be made.
"But, Mr. Carleton, Sir," said that lady, "I am not at all sure that it would be the best thing for Miss Ringgan — if she is better — I think it would do her far more good to go to rest, and let sleep finish her cure, before taking something that will make sleep impossible."
"Did you ever hear of a physician, Mrs. Evelyn," he said, smiling, "'that allowed his prescriptions to be interfered with? I must beg you will do me this favour."
"I doubt very much whether it will be a favour to Miss Ringgan," said Mrs. Evelyn — "however —"
And she rang the bell, and gave the desired order, with a somewhat disconcerted face. But Mr. Carleton again left Fleda to herself, and devoted his attention to the other ladies, with so much success, though with his usual absence of effort that good humour was served long before the coffee.
Then, indeed, he played the physician's part again — made the coffee himself, and saw it taken, according to his own pleasure — skilfully, however, seeming all the while, except to Fleda, to be occupied with everything else. The group gathered round her anew; she was well enough to bear their talk by this time — by the time the coffee was drunk, quite well.
"Is it quite gone?" asked Edith.
"The headache? — yes."
"You will owe your physician a great many thanks, my dear Fleda," said Mrs. Evelyn.
Fleda's only answer to this, however, was by a very slight smile; and she presently left the room, to go up stairs and arrange her yet disarranged hair.
"That is a very fine girl," remarked Mrs. Evelyn, preparing half a cup of coffee for herself in a kind of amused abstraction. "My friend Mr. Thorn will have an excellent wife of her."
"Provided she marries him," said Constance, somewhat shortly.
"I am sure I hope she wont," said Edith; "and I don't believe she will."
"What do you think of his chances of success, Mr. Carleton?"
"Your manner of speech would seem to imply that they are very good, Mrs. Evelyn," he answered, coolly.
"Well, don't you think so?" said Mrs. Evelyn, coming back to her seat with her coffee-cup, and apparently dividing her attention between it and her subject. "It's a great chance for her — most girls in her circumstances would not refuse it — _I_ think he's pretty sure of his ground."
"So I think," said Florence.
"It don't prove anything, if he is," said Constance, drily. "I hate people who are always sure of their ground."
"What do you think, Mr. Carleton?" said Mrs. Evelyn, taking little satisfied sips of her coffee.
"May I ask, first, what is meant by the 'chance,' and what by the 'circumstances.' "
"Why, Mr. Thorn has a fine fortune, you know, and he is of an excellent family — there is not a better family in the city — and very few young men of such pretensions would think of a girl that has no name nor standing."
"Unless she had qualities that would command them," said Mr.
Carleton.
"But, Mr. Carleton, Sir," said the lady, "Do you think that can be? do you think a woman can fill, gracefully, a high place in society, if she has had disadvantages in early life to contend with, that were calculated to unfit her for it?"
"But, mamma," said Constance, "Fleda don't show any such thing."
"No, she don't show it," said Mrs. Evelyn, "but I am not talking of Fleda — I am talking of the effect of early disadvantages. What do you think, Mr. Carleton?"
"Disadvantages of what kind, Mrs. Evelyn?"
"Why, for instance — the strange habits of intercourse, on familiar terms, with rough and uncultivated people — such intercourse, for years — in all sorts of ways — in the field and in the house — mingling with them as one of them — it seems to me, it must leave its traces on the mind, and on the habits of acting and thinking."
"There is no doubt it does," he answered, with an extremely unconcerned face.
"And then, there's the actual want of cultivation," said Mrs.
Evelyn, warming — "time taken up with other things, you know — usefully and properly, but still taken up — so as to make much intellectual acquirement and accomplishments impossible; it can't be otherwise, you know — neither opportunity nor instructors; and I don't think anything can supply the want in after life. It isn't the mere things themselves which may be acquired — the mind should grow up in the atmosphere of them — don't you think so, Mr. Carleton?"
He bowed.
"Music, for instance, and languages, and converse with society, and a great many things, are put completely beyond reach — Edith, my dear, you are not to touch the coffee — nor Constance either — no, I will not let you — And there could not be even much reading, for want of books, if for nothing else. Perhaps I am wrong, but I confess I don't see how it is possible in such a case" — She checked herself suddenly, for Fleda, with the slow, noiseless step that weakness imposed, had come in again, and stood by the centre-table.
"We are discussing a knotty question, Miss Ringgan," said Mr.
Carleton, with a smile, as he brought a _bergère_ for her; "I should like to have your voice on it."
There was no seconding of his motion. He waited till she had seated herself, and then went on.
"What, in your opinion, is the best preparation for wearing prosperity well?"
A glance at Mrs. Evelyn's face, which was opposite her, and at one or two others, which had, undeniably, the air of being _arrested_, was enough for Fleda's quick apprehension. She knew they had been talking of her. Her eye stopped short of Mr.
Carleton's, and she coloured, and hesitated. No one spoke.
"By prosperity, you mean —"
"Rank and fortune," said Florence, without looking up.
"Marrying a rich man, for instance," said Edith, "and having one's hands full."
This peculiar statement of the case occasioned a laugh all round, but the silence which followed seemed still to wait upon Fleda's reply.
"Am I expected to give a serious answer to that question?" she said, a little doubtfully.
"Expectations are not stringent things," said her first questioner, smiling. "That waits upon your choice."
"They are horridly stringent, _I_ think," said Constance.
"We shall all be disappointed, if you don't, Fleda, my dear."
"By wearing it 'well,' you mean making a good use of it?"
"And gracefully," said Mrs. Evelyn.
"I think I should say, then," said Fleda, after some little.
Hesitation, and speaking with evident difficulty — "such an a experience as might teach one both the worth and the worthlessness of money."
Mr. Carleton's smile was a sufficiently satisfied one; but Mrs. Evelyn retorted — "The _worth_ and the _worthlessness!_ — Fleda, my dear, I don't understand —"
"And what experience teaches one the worth, and what the worthlessness of money?" said Constance; "mamma is morbidly persuaded that I do not understand the first — of the second I have an indefinite idea, from never being able to do more than half that I want with it."
Fleda smiled and hesitated again, in a way that showed she would willingly be excused, but the silence left her no choice but to speak.
"I think,'' she said, modestly, "that a person can hardly understand the true worth of money — the ends it can best subserve — that has not been taught it by his own experience of the want; and" — "What follows?" said Mr. Carleton.
"I was going to say, Sir, that there is danger, especially when people have not been accustomed to it, that they will greatly overvalue and misplace the real worth of prosperity;
unless the mind has been steadied by another kind of experience, and has learnt to measure things by a higher scale."
"And how when they _have_ been accustomed to it?" said Florence.
"The same danger, without the 'especially,' " said Fleda, with a look that disclaimed any assuming.
"One thing is certain," said Constance, "you hardly ever see _les nouveaux riches_ make a graceful use of anything. Fleda, my dear, I am seconding all of your last speech that I understand. Mamma, I perceive, is at work upon the rest."
"I think we ought all to be at work upon it," said Mrs.
Evelyn, "for Miss Ringgan has made it out that there is hardly anybody here that is qualified to wear prosperity well."
"I was just thinking so," said Florence.
Fleda said nothing, and perhaps her colour rose a little.
"I will take lessons of her," said Constance, with eyebrows just raised enough to neutralize the composed gravity of the other features, "as soon as I have an amount of prosperity that will make it worth while."
"But I don't think," said Florence, "that a graceful use of things is consistent with such a careful valuation and considering of the exact worth of everything — it's not my idea of grace."
"Yet _propriety_ is an essential element of gracefulness, Miss Evelyn."
"Well," said Florence, "certainly; but what then?"
"Is it attainable, in the use of means, without a nice knowledge of their true value?"
"But, Mr. Carleton, I am sure I have seen improper things — things improper in a way — gracefully done?"
"No doubt; but, Miss Evelyn," said he, smiling, "the impropriety did not in those cases, I presume, attach itself to the other quality. The graceful _manner_ was strictly proper to its ends, was it not, however the ends might be false?"
"I don't know," said Florence, "you have gone too deep for me.
But do you think that close calculation, and all that sort of thing, is likely to make people use money, or anything else, gracefully? I never thought it did."
"Not close calculation alone," said Mr. Carleton.
"But do you think it is _consistent_ with gracefulness?"
"The largest and grandest views of material things that man has ever taken, Miss Evelyn, stand upon a basis of the closest calculation."
Florence worked at her worsted, and looked very dissatisfied.
"Oh, Mr. Carleton," said Constance, as he was going, "don't leave your vinaigrette — there it is — on the table."
He made no motion to take it up.
"Don't you know, Miss Constance, that physicians seldom like to have anything to do with their own prescriptions."
"It's very suspicious of them," said Constance; "but you must take it Mr. Carleton, if you please, for I shouldn't like the responsibility of its being left here; and I am afraid it would be dangerous to our peace of mind, besides."
"I shall risk that," he said, laughing. "Its work is not done."
"And then, Mr. Carleton," said Mrs. Evelyn, and Fleda knew with what a look, "you know physicians are accustomed to be paid when their prescriptions are taken."
But the answer to this was only a bow, so expressive in its air of haughty coldness, that any further efforts of Mrs.
Evelyn's wit were chilled for some minutes after he had gone.
Fleda had not seen this. She had taken up the vinaigrette, and was thinking with acute pleasure that Mr. Carleton's manner last night and to-night had returned to all the familiar kindness of old times. Not as it had been during the rest of her stay in the city. She could be quite contented now to have him go back to England, with this pleasant remembrance left her. She sat turning over the vinaigrette, which to her fancy was covered with hieroglyphics that no one else could read; of her uncle's affair, of Charlton's danger, of her own distress, and the kindness which had wrought its relief, more penetrating and pleasant than even the fine aromatic scent which fairly typified it. Constance's voice broke in upon her musings.
"Isn't it awkward?" she said, as she saw Fleda handling and looking at the pretty toy — "Isn't it awkward? I sha'n't have a bit of rest now for fear something will happen to that. I hate to have people do such things."
"Fleda, my dear," said Mrs. Evelyn, "I wouldn't handle it, my love; you may depend there is some charm in it — some mischievous, hidden influence — and if you have much to do with it, I am afraid you will find a gradual coldness stealing over you, and a strange forgetfulness of Queechy, and you will perhaps lose your desire ever to go back there any more."
The vinaigrette dropped from Fleda's fingers, but beyond a heightened colour and a little tremulous gravity about the lip, she gave no other sign of emotion.
"Mamma," said Florence, laughing, "you are too bad !"
"Mamma," said Constance, "I wonder how any tender sentiment for you can continue to exist in Fleda's breast! By the way, Fleda, my dear, do you know that we have heard of two escorts for you? but I only tell you because I know you'll not be fit to travel this age."
"I should not be able to travel to-morrow," said Fleda.
"They are not going to-morrow," said Mrs. Evelyn, quietly.
"Who are they ?"
"Excellent ones," said Mrs. Evelyn. "One of them is your old friend, Mr. Olmney."
"Mr. Olmney!" said Fleda. "What has brought him to New York?"
"Really," said Mrs. Evelyn, laughing, "I do not know. What should keep him away? I was very glad to see him, for my part.
Maybe he has come to take you home."
"Who is the other?" said Fleda.
"That's another old friend of yours — Mrs. Renney."
"Mrs. Renney? who is she?" said Fleda.
"Why, don't you know? Mrs. Renney — she used to live with your aunt Lucy, in some capacity — years ago, when she was in New York — housekeeper, I think; don't you remember her?"
"Perfectly now," said Fleda. "Mrs. Renney!" — "She has been housekeeper for Mrs. Schenck these several years, and she is going somewhere out West to some relation, her brother, I believe, to take care of his family; and her road leads her your way."
"When do they go, Mrs. Evelyn?"
"Both the same day, and both the day after to-morrow. Mr.
Olmney takes the morning train, he says, unless you would prefer some other. I told him you were very anxious to go; and Mrs. Renney goes in the afternoon. So there's a choice for you."
"Mamma," said Constance, "Fleda is not fit to go at all, either time."
"I don't think she is," said Mrs. Evelyn. "But she knows best what she likes to do."
Thoughts and resolutions come swiftly one after another into Fleda's mind, and were decided upon in as quick succession.
First, that she must go the day after to-morrow at all events;
second, that it should not be with Mr. Olmney; third, that to prevent that, she must not see him in the meantime — and, therefore — yes, no help for it — must refuse to see any one that called the next day; there was to be a party in the evening, so then she would be safe. No doubt Mr. Carleton would come, to give her a more particular account of what he had done, and she wished unspeakably to hear it; but it was not possible that she should make an exception in his favour and admit him alone. That could not be. If friends would only be simple, and straightforward, and kind, one could afford to be straightforward too; but as it was, she must not do what she longed to do, and they would be sure to misunderstand.
There was, indeed, the morning of the day following left her, if Mr. Olmney did not take it into his head to stay. And it might issue in her not seeing Mr. Carleton at all, to bid good-bye and thank him? He would not think her ungrateful, he knew better than that, but still — Well! so much for kindness!
— "What _are_ you looking so grave about? said Constance.
"Considering ways and means," Fleda said, with a slight smile.
"Ways and means of what?"
"Going."
"You don't mean to go the day after to-morrow?"
"Yes."
"It's too absurd for anything! You sha'n't do it."
"I must, indeed."
"Mamma," said Constance, "if you permit such a thing, I shall hope that memory will be a fingerboard of remorse to you,"
pointing to Miss Ringgan's pale cheeks.
"I shall charge it entirely upon Miss Ringgan's own fingerboard," said Mrs. Evelyn, with her complacently amused face. "Fleda, my dear, shall I request Mr. Olmney to delay his journey for a day or two, my love, till you are stronger?"
"Not at all, Mrs. Evelyn! I shall go then; — if I am not ready in the morning, I will take Mrs. Renney in the afternoon — I would quite as lief go with her."
"Then I will make Mr. Olmney keep to his first purpose," said Mrs. Evelyn.
Poor Fleda, though with a very sorrowful heart, kept her resolutions, and for very forlornness and weariness, slept away a great part of the next day. Neither would she appear in the evening, for fear of more people than one. It was impossible to tell whether Mrs. Evelyn's love of mischief would not bring Mr. Olmney there, and the Thorns, she knew, were invited. Mr. Lewis would probably absent himself, but Fleda could not endure even the chance of seeing his mother.
She wanted to know, but dared not ask, whether Mr. Carleton had been to see her. What if to-morrow morning should pass without her seeing him? Fleda pondered this uncertainty a little, and then jumped out of bed, and wrote him the heartiest little note of thanks and remembrance that tears would let her write; sealed it, and carried it herself to the nearest branch of the despatch post the first thing next morning.
She took a long look that same morning at the little vinaigrette, which still lay on the centre-table, wishing very much to take it up stairs and pack it away among her things.
It was meant for her, she knew, and she wanted it as a very pleasant relic from the kind hands that had given it; and besides, he might think it odd, if she should slight his intention. But how odd it would seem to him if he knew that the Evelyns had half appropriated it. And appropriate it anew, in another direction, she could not. She could not, without their knowledge, and they would put their own absurd construction on what was a simple matter of kindness; she could not brave it.
The morning — a long one it was — had passed away; Fleda had just finished packing her trunk, and was sitting with a faint- hearted feeling of body and mind, trying to rest before being called to her early dinner, when Florence came to tell her it was ready.
"Mr. Carleton was here a while ago," she said, "and he asked for you; but mamma said you were busy; she knew you had enough to tire you without coming down stairs to see him. He asked when you thought of going."
"What did you tell him?"
"I told him, 'Oh, you were not gone yet!' — it's such a plague to be bidding people good-bye — _I_ always want to get rid of it. Was I right?"
Fleda said nothing, but in her heart she wondered what possible concern it could be of her friends if Mr. Carleton wanted to see her before she went away. She felt it was unkind — they did not know how unkind, for they did not understand that he was a very particular friend, and an old friend — they could not tell what reason there was for her wishing to bid him good-bye. She thought she should have liked to do it, very much.
CHAPTER XX.
"Methought I was — there is no man can tell what. Methought I was, and methought I had — But man is but a patched fool, if he will offer to say what methought I had."
MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.
Mrs. Evelyn drove down to the boat with Fleda, and did not leave her till she was safely put in charge of Mrs. Renney.
Fleda immediately retreated to the. innermost depths of the ladies' cabin, hoping to find some rest for the body at least, if not forgetfulness for the mind.
The latter was not to be. Mrs. Renney was exceeding glad to see her, and bent upon knowing what had become of her since those days when they used to know each other.
"You're just the same, Miss Fleda, that you used to be — you're very little altered — I can see that — though you're looking a good-deal more thin and pale; you had very pretty roses in your cheeks in those times. Yes, I know, I understood Mrs. Evelyn to say you had not been well; but, allowing for that, I can see you are just yourself still — I'm glad of it.
Do you recollect, Miss Fleda, what a little thing you was then?"
"I recollect, very well," said Fleda.
"I'm sure of another thing — you're just as good as you used to be," said the housekeeper, looking at her complacently. "Do you remember how you used to come into my room to see me make jelly? I see it as well as if it was yesterday; and you used to beg me to let you squeeze the lemons; and I never could refuse you, because you never did anything I didn't want you to. And do you mind how I used to tie you up in a big towel, for fear you would stain your dress with the acid, and I'd stand and watch to see you putting all your strength to squeeze 'em clean, and be afraid that Mrs. Rossitur would be angry with me for letting you spoil your hands; but you used to look up and smile at me so, I couldn't help myself, but let you do just whatever you had a mind? You don't look quite so light and bright as you did in those times; — but, to be sure, you aint feeling well! See here — just let me pull some of these things onto this settee, and you put yourself down there and rest — pillows — let's have another pillow — there, how's that?"
Oh, if Fleda might have silenced her! She thought it was rather hard that she should have two talkative companions on this journey of all others. The housekeeper paused no longer than to arrange her couch and see her comfortably laid down.
"And then Mr. Hugh would come in to find you and carry you away — he never could bear to be long from you. How is Mr.
Hugh, Miss Fleda? he used to be always a very delicate-looking child. I remember you and him used to be always together — he was a very sweet boy! I have often said I never saw such another pair of children. How does Mr. Hugh have his health, Miss Fleda?"
"Not very well, just now," said Fleda, gently, and shutting her eyes that they might reveal less.
There was need; for the housekeeper went on to ask particularly after every member of the family, and where they had been living, and as much as she conveniently could about how they had been living. She was very kind through it all, or she tried to be; but Fleda felt there was a difference since the time when her aunt kept house in State Street, and Mrs.
Renney made jellies for her. When her neighbours' affairs were exhausted, Mrs. Renney fell back upon her own, and gave Fleda a very circumstantial account of the occurrences that were drawing her westward; how so many years ago her brother had married and removed thither; how lately his wife had died;
what, in general, was the character of his wife, and what, in particular, the story of her decease; how many children were left without care, and the state of her brother's business, which demanded a great deal; and how, finally, she, Mrs.
Renney, had received and accepted an invitation to go on to Belle Rivière, and be housekeeper de son chef. And as Fleda's pale worn face had for some time given her no sign of attention, the housekeeper then hoped she was asleep, an placed herself so as to screen her, and have herself a good view of everything that was going on in the cabin.
But poor Fleda was not asleep, much as she rejoiced in being thought so. Mind and body could get no repose, sadly as the condition of both called for it. Too worn to sleep, perhaps; — too down-hearted to rest. She blamed herself for it, and told over to herself the causes, the recent causes, she had of joy and gratitude; but it would not do. Grateful she could be and was; but tears that were not the distillation of joy came with her gratitude; came from under the closed eyelid in spite of her; the pillow was wet with them. She excused herself, or tried to, with thinking that she was weak and not very well, and that her nerves had gone through so much for a few days past, it was no wonder if a reaction left her without her usual strength of mind. And she could not help thinking, there had been a want of kindness in the Evelyns to let her come away to-day to make such a journey, at such a season, under such guardianship. But it was not all that; she knew it was not. The journey was a small matter; only a little piece of disagreeableness that was well in keeping with her other meditations. She was going home, and home had lost all its fair-seeming; its honours were withered. It would be pleasant indeed to be there again to nurse Hugh; but nurse him for what? — life or death? — she did not like to think; and beyond that she could fix upon nothing at all that looked bright in the prospect; she almost thought herself wicked, but she could not. If she might hope that her uncle would take hold of his farm like a man, and redeem his character and his family's happiness on the old place — that would have been something;
but he had declared a different purpose, and Fleda knew him too well to hope that he would be better than his word. Then they must leave the old homestead, where at least the associations of happiness clung, and go to a strange land. It looked desolate to Fleda, wherever it might be. Leave Queechy!
— that she loved unspeakably beyond any other place in the world; where the very hills had been the friends of her childhood, and where she had seen the maples grow green and grow red, through as many coloured changes of her own fortunes; the woods where the shade of her grandfather walked with her, and where the presence even of her father could be brought back by memory; where the air was sweeter and the sunlight brighter; by far, than in any other place — for both had some strange kindred with the sunny days of long ago. Poor Fleda turned her face from Mrs. Renney, and leaving doubtful prospects and withering comforts for a while, as it were, out of sight, she wept the fair outlines and the red maples of Queechy, as if they had been all she had to regret. They had never disappointed her. Their countenance had comforted her many a time, under many a sorrow. After all, it was only fancy choosing at which shrine the whole offering of sorrow should be made. She knew that many of the tears that fell were due to some other. It was in vain to tell herself they were selfish;
mind and body were in no condition to struggle with anything.
It had fallen dark some time, and she had wept and sorrowed herself into a half-dozing state, when a few words spoken near aroused her.
"It is snowing," was said by several voices.
"Going very slow, aint we?" said Fleda's friend, in a suppressed voice.
"Yes, 'cause it's so dark, you see; the Captain durstn't let her run."
Some poor witticism followed from a third party about the "Butterfly's" having run herself off her legs the first time she ever ran at all; and then Mrs. Renney went on.
"Is the storm so bad, Hannah?"
"Pretty thick — can't see far ahead — I hope we'll make out to find our way in — that's all I care for."
"How far are we?"
"Not half way yet — I don't know — depends on what headway we make, you know; — there aint much wind yet, that's a good thing."
"There aint any danger, is there?"
This, of course, the chambermaid denied, and a whispered colloquy followed, which Fleda did not try to catch. A new feeling came upon her weary heart — a feeling of fear. There was a sad twinge of a wish that she were out of the boat, and safe back again with the Evelyns; and a fresh sense of the unkindness of letting her come away that afternoon so attended. And then, with that sickness of heart, the forlorn feeling of being alone, of wanting some one at hand to depend upon, to look to. It is true, that, in case of real danger, none such could be a real protection; and yet lot so neither, for strength and decision can live and make live, where a moment's faltering will kill; and weakness must often falter of necessity. "All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth"
to his people; she thought of that, and yet she feared — for his ways are often what we do not like. A few moments of sick- heartedness and trembling — and then Fleda mentally folded her arms about a few other words of the Bible, and laid her head down in quiet again. — "_The Lord is my refuge and my fortress:
my God: in him will I trust_."
And then what comes after — "_He shall cover thee with his feathers; and under his wings shalt thou trust; his truth shall be thy shield and buckler_."
Fleda lay quiet till she was called to tea.
"Bless me, how pale you are?" said the housekeeper, as Fleda raised herself up at this summons; "do you feel very bad, Miss Fleda?"
Fleda said "No."
"Are you frighted?" said the housekeeper — "there's no need of that — Hannah says there's no need — we'll be in by and by."
"No, Mrs. Renney," said Fleda, smiling. "I believe I am not very strong yet."
The housekeeper and Hannah both looked at her with strangely touched faces, and again begged her to try the refreshment of tea. But Fleda would not go down, so they served her up there, with great zeal and tenderness. And then she waited patiently and watched the people in the cabin, as they sat gossiping in groups, or stupefying in solitude; and thought how miserable a thing is existence where religion and refinement have not taught the mind to live in somewhat beyond and above its every-day concerns.
Late at night the boat arrived safe at Bridgeport. Mrs. Renney and Fleda had resolved to stay on board till morning, when the former promised to take her to the house of a sister she had living in the town; as the cars would not leave the place till near eleven o'clock. Rest was not to be hoped for meantime in the boat, on the miserable couch which was the best the cabin could furnish; but Fleda was so thankful to have finished the voyage in safety, that she took thankfully everything else, even lying awake. It was a wild night. The wind rose soon after they reached Bridgeport, and swept furiously over the boat, rattling the tiller chains, and making Fleda so nervously alive to possibilities that she got up two or three times to see if the boat were fast to her moorings. It was very dark, and only by a fortunately-placed lantern, she could see a bit of the dark wharf and one of the posts belonging to it, from which the lantern never budged; so, at last quieted, or tired-out, nature had her rights, and she slept.
It was not refreshing rest after all, and Fleda was very glad that Mrs. Renney's impatience for something comfortable made her willing to be astir as early as there was any chance of finding people up in the town. Few were abroad when they left the boat, they two. Not a foot had printed the deep layer of snow that covered the wharf. It had fallen thick during the night. Just then it was not snowing; the clouds seemed to have taken a recess, for they hung threatening yet; one uniform leaden canopy was over the whole horizon.
"The snow aint done yet," said Mrs. Renney.
"No, but the worst of our journey is over," said Fleda. "I am glad to be on the land."
"I hope we'll get something to eat here," said Mrs. Renney, as they stepped along over the wharf. "They ought to be ashamed to give people such a mess, when it's just as easy to have things decent. My! how it has snowed! I declare, if I'd ha'
known, I'd ha' waited till somebody had tracked a path for us.
But I guess it's just as well we didn't; you look as like a ghost as you can, Miss Fleda. You'll be better when you get some breakfast. You'd better catch on to my arm — I'll waken up the seven sleepers but what I'll have something to put life into you directly."
Fleda thanked her, but declined the proffered accommodation, and followed her companion in the narrow beaten path a few travellers had made in the street, feeling enough like a ghost, if want of flesh and blood reality were enough. It seemed a dream that she was walking through the grey light, and the empty streets of the little town; everything looked and felt so wild and strange.
If it was a dream, she was soon waked out of it. In the house, where they were presently received and established in sufficient comfort, there was such a little specimen of masculine humanity as never showed his face in dream-land yet — a little bit of reality, enough to bring any dreamer to his senses. He seemed to have been brought up on stove heat, for he was all glowing yet from a very warm bed he had just tumbled out of somewhere, and he looked at the pale thin stranger by his mother's fire-place, as if she were an anomaly in the comfortable world. If he could have contented himself with looking! — but he planted himself firmly on the rug, just two feet from Fleda, and, with a laudable and most persistent desire to examine into the causes of what he could not understand, he commenced inquiring — "Are you cold? — say! Are you cold? — say!" in a tone most provokingly made up of wonder and dulness. In vain Fleda answered him, that she was not very cold, and would soon not be cold at all by that good fire — the question came again, apparently in all its freshness, from the interrogator's mind — "Are you cold? — say !" — And silence and words, looking grave and laughing, were alike thrown away. Fleda shut her eyes at length, and used the small remnant of her patience to keep herself quiet till she was called to breakfast. After breakfast she accepted the offer of her hostess to go up stairs and lie down till the cars were ready; and there got some real and much needed refreshment of sleep and rest.
It lasted longer than she had counted upon. For the cars were not ready at eleven o'clock — the snow last night had occasioned some perplexing delays. It was not till near three o'clock, that the often-despatched messenger to the depôt brought back word that they might go as soon as they pleased.
It pleased Mrs. Renney to be in a great hurry, for her baggage was in the cars, she said, and it would be dreadful if she and it went different ways; so Fleda and her companion hastened down to the station-house and chose their places some time before anybody else thought of coming. They had a long, very tiresome waiting to go through, and room for some uneasy speculations about being belated and a night-journey. But Fleda was stronger now, and bore it all with her usual patient submission At length, by degrees, the people dropped in and filled the cars, and they set off.
"How early do you suppose we shall reach Greenfield?" said Fleda.
"Why, we ought to get there between nine and ten o'clock, I should think," said her companion. "I hope the snow will hold up till we get there."
Fleda thought it a hope very unlikely to be fulfilled. There were as yet no snow-flakes to be seen near by, but, at a little distance, the low clouds seemed already to enshroud every clump of trees, and put a mist about every hill. They surely would descend more palpably soon.
It was pleasant to be moving swiftly on again towards the end of their journey, if Fleda could have rid herself of some qualms about the possible storm and the certain darkness; they might not reach Greenfield by ten o'clock; and she disliked travelling in the night at any time. But she could do nothing, and she resigned herself anew to the comfort and trust she had built upon last night. She had the seat next the window, and with a very sober kind of pleasure watched the pretty landscape they were flitting by — misty as her own prospects — darkening as they? — no, she would not allow that thought. "
'Surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God;'
and I can trust Him." And she found a strange sweetness in that naked trust and clinging of faith, that faith never tried never knows. But the breath of daylight was already gone, though the universal spread of snow gave the eye a fair range yet, white, white, as far as the view could reach, with that light misty drapery round everything in the distance, and merging into the soft grey sky; and every now and then, as the wind served, a thick wreath of white vapour came by from the engine and hid all, eddying past the windows, and then skimming off away over the snowy ground from which it would not lift; a more palpable veil for a moment of the distant things — and then broken, scattered, fragmentary, lovely in its frailty, and evanishing. It was a pretty afternoon, but a sober; and the bare, black, solitary trees near hand which the cars flew by, looked to Fleda constantly like finger-posts of the past; and back, at their bidding, her thoughts and her spirits went, back and forward, comparing, in her own mental view what had once been so gay and genial with its present bleak and chill condition. And from this, in sudden contrast, came a strangely fair and bright image of heaven — its exchange of peace for all this turmoil — of rest for all this weary bearing up of mind and body against the ills that beset both — of its quiet home for this unstable strange world, where nothing is at a standstill — of perfect and pure society for the unsatisfactory and wearying friendships that the most are here. The thought came to Fleda like one of those unearthly clear north-western skies from which a storm-cloud has rolled away, that seem almost to mock earth with their distance from its defilement and agitations. "Truly I know that it shall be well with them that fear God!" She could remember Hugh — she could not think of the words without him — and yet say them with the full bounding assurance. And in that weary and uneasy afternoon, her mind rested and delighted itself with two lines of George Herbert, that only a Christian can well understand — "Thy power and love, my love and trust, Make one place everywhere."
But the night fell, and Fleda at last could see nothing but the dim rail-fences they were flying by, and the reflection from some stationary lantern on the engine, or one of the forward cars, that always threw a bright spot of light on the snow. Still she kept her eyes fastened out of the window;
anything but the view _inboard_. They were going slowly now, and frequently stopping; for they were out of time, and some other trains were to be looked-out for. Nervous work; and whenever they stopped, the voices which at other times were happily drowned in the rolling of the car-wheels, rose and jarred in discords far less endurable. Fleda shut her ears to the words, but it was easy enough without words to understand the indications of coarse and disagreeable natures in whose neighbourhood she disliked to find herself — of whose neighbourhood she exceedingly disliked to be reminded. The muttered oath, the more than muttered jest, the various laughs that tell so much of head or heart emptiness — the shadowy but sure tokens of that in human nature which one would not realize, and which one strives to forget; Fleda shrank within herself, and would gladly have stopped her ears; did sometimes covertly. Oh, if home could be but reached, and she out of this atmosphere! how well she resolved that never another time, by any motive of delicacy, or otherwise, she would be tempted to trust herself in the like again without more than womanly protection. The hours rolled wearily on; they heard nothing of Greenfield yet.
They came at length to a more obstinate stop than usual. Fleda took her hands from her ears to ask what was the matter.
"I don't know," said Mrs. Renney. "I hope they won't keep us a great while waiting here."
The door swung open, and the red comforter and tarpaulin hat of one of the breakmen showed itself a moment. Presently after, "Can't get on," was repeated by several voices in the various tones of assertion, interrogation, and impatience. The women folks, having nobody to ask questions of, had nothing for it but to be quiet and use their ears.
"Can't get on!" said another man, coming in — "there's nothing but snow out o' doors — track's all foul."
A number of people instantly rushed out to see.
"Can't get on any further to-night?" asked a quiet old gentleman of the news-bringer.
"Not another inch, Sir; worse off than old Dobbs was in the mill-pond — we've got half way, but we can't turn and go back."
"And what are we going to do?" said an unhappy wight, not quick in drawing conclusions.
"I s'pose we'll all be stiff by the morning," answered the other, gravely — "unless the wood holds out, which aint likely."
How much there is in even a cheery tone of voice. Fleda was sorry when this man took his away with him. There was a most uncheering confusion of tongues for a few minutes among the people he had left, and then the car was near deserted;
everybody went out to bring his own wits to bear upon the obstacles in the way of their progress. Mrs. Renney observed that she might as well warm her feet while she could, and went to the stove for the purpose.
Poor Fleda felt as if she had no heart left. She sat still in her place, and leaned her head upon the back of the deserted chair before her, in utter inability to keep it up. The night journey was bad enough, but _this_ was more than she had counted upon. Danger, to be sure, there might be none in standing still there all night, unless, perhaps, the danger of death from the cold. She had heard of such things; but to sit there till morning among all those people, and obliged to hear their unloosed tongues, Fleda felt almost that she could not bear it — a most forlorn feeling, with which came anew a keen reflection upon the Evelyns, for having permitted her to run even the hazard of such trouble. And in the morning, if well it came, who would take care of them in all the subsequent annoyance and difficulty of getting out of the snow?
It must have taken very little time for these thoughts to run through her head, for half a minute had not flown, when the vacant seat beside her was occupied, and a band softly touched one of hers which lay in her lap. Fleda started up in terror, to have the hand taken and her eye met by Mr. Carleton.
"Mr. Carleton! — O Sir, how glad I am to see you!" was said by eye and cheek, as unmistakably as by word.
"Have you come from the clouds?"
"I might rather ask that question of you," said he, smiling.
"You have been invisible ever since the night when I had the honour of playing the part of your physician."
"I could not help it, Sir — I was sure you would believe it. I wanted exceedingly to see you, and to thank you as well as I could, but I was obliged to leave it."
She could hardly say so much. Her swimming eye gave him more thanks than he wanted. But she scolded herself vigorously, and after a few minutes, was able to look and speak again.
"I hoped you would not think me ungrateful, Sir, but in case you might, I wrote to let you know that you were mistaken."
"You wrote to me?" said he.
"Yes, Sir, yesterday morning — at least it put in the post yesterday morning."
"It was more unnecessary than you are aware of," he said, with a smile, and turning one of his deep looks away from her.
"Are we fast here for all night, Mr. Carleton!" she said, presently.
"I am afraid so — I believe so — I have been out to examine, and the storm is very thick."
"You need not look so about it for me," said Fleda — "I don't care for it all now."
And a long-drawn breath half told how much she had cared for it, and what a burden was gone.
"You look very little like breasting hardships," said Mr.
Carleton, bending on her so exactly the look of affectionate care that she had often had from him when she was a child, that Fleda was very near overcome again.
"Oh, you know," she said, speaking by dint of great force upon herself — "you know the will is everything, and mine is very good."
But he looked extremely unconvinced and unsatisfied.
"I am so comforted to see you sitting there, Sir," Fleda went on gratefully, "that I am sure I can bear patiently all the rest."
His eye turned away, and she did not know what to make of his gravity. But a moment after, he looked again, and spoke with his usual manner.
"That business you entrusted to me," he said, in a lower tone, — "I believe you will have no more trouble with it."
"So I thought! — so I gathered, the other night," said Fleda, her heart and her face suddenly full of many things.
"The note was given up — I saw it burned."
Fleda's two hands clasped each other mutely.
"And will he be silent?"
"I think he will choose to be so, for his own sake."
The only sake that would avail in that quarter, Fleda knew.
How had Mr. Carleton ever managed it?
"And Charlton?" she said, after a few minutes' cheerful musing.
"I had the pleasure of Captain Rossitur's company to breakfast the next morning, and I am happy to report that there is no danger of any trouble arising there."
"How shall I ever thank you, Sir!" said Fleda, with trembling lips.
His smile was so peculiar, she almost thought he was going to tell her. But just then, Mrs. Renney having accomplished the desirable temperature of her feet, came back to warm her ears, and placed herself on the next seat — happily not the one behind, but the one before them, where her eyes were thrown away; and the lines of Mr. Carleton's mouth came back to their usual quiet expression.
"You were in particular haste to reach home?" he asked.
Fleda said no, not in the abstract; it made no difference whether to-day or to-morrow.
"You had heard no ill news of your cousin?"
"Not at all, but it is difficult to find an opportunity of making the journey, and I thought I ought to come yesterday."
He was silent again; and the baffled seekers after ways and means, who had gone out to try arguments upon the storm, began to come pouring back into the car. And bringing with them not only their loud and coarse voices, with every shade of disagreeableness, aggravated by ill-humour, but also an average amount of snow upon their hats and shoulders, the place was soon full of a reeking atmosphere of great-coats.
Fleda was trying to put up her window, but Mr. Carleton gently stopped her, and began bargaining with a neighbouring fellow- traveller for the opening of his.
"Well, Sir, I'll open it if you wish it," said the man, civilly, "but they say we sha'n't have nothing to make fires with more than an hour or two longer; so maybe you'll think we can't afford to let any too much cold in."
The gentleman however, persisting in his wish, and the wish being moreover backed with those arguments to which every grade of human reason is accessible, the window was opened. At first the rush of fresh air was a great relief; but it was not very long before the raw snowy atmosphere, which made its way in, was felt to be more dangerous, if it was more endurable, than the close pent-up one it displaced. Mr. Carleton ordered the window closed again; and Fleda's glance of meek grateful patience was enough to pay any reasonable man for his share of the suffering. _Her_ share of it was another matter. Perhaps Mr.
Carleton thought so, for he immediately bent himself to reward her and to avert the evil, and for that purpose brought into play every talent of manner and conversation that could beguile the time, and make her forget what she was among. If success were his reward he had it. He withdrew her attention completely from all that was around her, and without tasking it; she could not have borne that. He did not seem to task himself; but without making any exertion, he held her eye and ear, and guarded both from communication with things disagreeable. He knew it. There was not a change in her eye's happy interest, till, in the course of the conversation, Fleda happened to mention Hugh, and he noticed the saddening of the eye immediately afterwards.
"Is he ill?" said Mr. Carleton.
"I don't know," said Fleda, faltering a little — "he was not — very — but a few weeks ago."
Her eye explained the broken sentences which there, in the neighbourhood of other ears, she dared not finish.
"He will be better after he has seen you," said Mr. Carleton, gently.
"Yes."
A very sorrowful and uncertain "yes," with an "if" in the speaker's mind, which she did not bring out.
"Can you sing your old song yet?" said Mr. Carleton, softly — "Yet one thing secures us, Whatever betide?"
But Fleda burst into tears.
"Forgive me," he whispered, earnestly, "for reminding you of that — you did not need it, and I have only troubled you."
"No, Sir, you have not," said Fleda — "it did not trouble me, and Hugh knows it better than I do. I cannot bear anything to- night I believe" — "So you have remembered that, Mr. Carleton?" she said, a minute after.
"Do you remember that?" said he, putting her old little Bible into her hand.
Fleda seized it, but she could hardly bear the throng of images that started up around it. The smooth worn cover brought so back the childish happy days when it had been her constant companion — the shadows of the Queechy of old, and Cynthia and her grandfather, and the very atmosphere of those times when she had led a light-hearted strange wild life all alone with them, reading the Encyclopaedia, and hunting out the wood-springs. She opened the book and slowly turned over the leaves where her father's hand had drawn those lines of remark and affection round many a passage — the very look of them she knew; but she could not see it now, for her eyes were dim, and tears were dropping fast into her lap — she hoped Mr.
Carleton did not see them, but she could not help it; she could only keep the book out of the way of being blotted. And there were other and later associations she had with it too — how dear! — how tender! — how grateful!
Mr. Carleton was quite silent for a good while — till the tears had ceased; then he bent towards her so as to be heard no further off.
"It has been for many years my best friend and companion," he said, in a low tone.
Fleda could make no answer, even by look.
"At first," he went on, softly, "I had a strong association of you with it; but the time came when I lost that entirely, and itself quite swallowed up the thought of the giver."
A quick glance and smile told how well Fleda understood, how heartily she was pleased with that. But she instantly looked away again.
"And now," said Mr. Carleton, after a pause — "for some time past, I have got the association again; and I do not choose to have it so. I have come to the resolution to put the book back into your hands, and not receive it again, unless the giver go with the gift."
Fleda looked up, a startled look of wonder, into his face, but the dark eye left no doubt of the meaning of his words; and in unbounded confusion she turned her own and her attention, ostensibly, to the book in her hand, though sight and sense were almost equally out of her power. For a few minutes poor Fleda felt as if all sensation had retreated to her finger- ends. She turned the leaves over and over, as if willing to cheat herself or her companion into the belief that she had something to think of there, while associations and images of the past were gone with a vengeance, swallowed up in a tremendous reality of the present; and the book, which a minute ago was her father's Bible, was now, — what was it? — something of Mr. Carleton's, which she must give back to him.
But still she held it and looked at it — conscious of no one distinct idea but that, and a faint one besides, that he might like to be repossessed of his property in some reasonable time — time like everything else was in a whirl? the only steady thing in creation seemed to be that perfectly still and moveless figure by her side — till her trembling fingers admonished her they would not be able to hold anything much longer; and gently and slowly, without looking, her hand put the book back towards Mr. Carleton. That both were detained together she knew, but hardly felt; — the thing was that she had given it! — There was no other answer; and there was no further need that Mr. Carleton should make any efforts for diverting her from the scene and the circumstances where they were. Probably he knew that, for he made none. He was perfectly silent for a long time, and Fleda was deaf to any other voice that could be raised, near or far. She could not even think.
Mrs. Renney was happily snoring, and most of the other people had descended into their coat collars, or, figuratively speaking, had lowered their blinds by tilting over their hats in some uncomfortable position that signified sleep; and comparative quiet had blessed the place for some time; as little noticed, indeed, by Fleda, as noise would have been.
The sole thing that she clearly recognized in connexion with the exterior world, was that clasp in which one of her hands lay. She did not know that the car had grown quiet, and that only an occasional grunt of ill-humour or waking-up colloquy testified that it was the unwonted domicile of a number of human beings, who were harbouring there in a disturbed state of mind. But this state of things could not last. The time came that had been threatened, when their last supply of extrinsic warmth was at an end. Despite shut windows, the darkening of the stove was presently followed by a very sensible and fast-increasing change of temperature; and this addition to their causes of discomfort roused every one of the company from his temporary lethargy. The growl of dissatisfied voices awoke again, more gruff than before; the spirit of jesting had long languished, and now died outright, and in its stead came some low, and deep, and bitter-spoken curses. Poor Mrs. Renney shook off her somnolency and shook her shoulders, a little business shake, admonitory to herself to keep cool;
and Fleda came to the consciousness that some very disagreeable chills were making their way over her.
"Are you warm enough?" said Mr. Carleton, suddenly, turning to her.
"Not quite," said Fleda, hesitating; "I feel the cold a little. Please don't, Mr. Carleton!" she added, earnestly, as she saw him preparing to throw off his cloak, the identical black fox which Constance had described, with so much vivacity; "pray do not. I am not very cold — I can bear a little — I am not so tender as you think me; I do not need it, and you would feel the want very much after wearing it. I won't put it on."
But he smilingly bade her "stand up," stooping down and taking one of her hands to enforce his words, and giving her, at the same time, the benefit of one of those looks of good-humoured wilfulness to which his mother always yielded, and to which Fleda yielded instantly, though with a colour considerably heightened at the slight touch of peremptoriness in his tone.
"You are not offended with me, Elfie?" he said, in another manner, when she had sat down again, and he was arranging the heavy folds of the cloak.
Offended! — a glance answered.
"You shall have everything your own way," he whispered, gently, as he stooped down to bring the cloak under her feet, "_except yourself_."
What good care should be taken of that exception was said in the dark eye at which Fleda hardly ventured half a glance. She had much ado to command herself.
She was shielded again from all the sights and sounds within reach. She was in a maze. The comfort of the fur-cloak was curiously mixed with the feeling of something else, of which that was an emblem — a surrounding of care and strength which would effectually be exerted for her protection — somewhat that Fleda had not known for many a long day — the making up of the old want. Fleda had it in her heart to cry like a baby.
Such a dash of sunlight had fallen at her feet that she hardly dared look at it for fear of being dazzled; but she could not look anywhere that she did not see the reflection.
In the mean time the carful of people settled again into sullen quietude. The cold was not found propitious to quarrelling. Those who could subsided again into lethargy;
those who could not, gathered in their outposts to make the best defence they might of the citadel. Most happily it was not an extreme night; cold enough to be very disagreeable, and even (without a fur-cloak) dangerous; but not enough to put even noses and ears in immediate jeopardy. Mr. Carleton had contrived to procure a comfortable wrapper for Mrs. Renney, from a Yankee, who, for the sake of being a "warm man" as to his pockets, was willing to be cold otherwise for a time. The rest of the great-coats and cloaks, which were so alert and erect a little while ago, were doubled up on every side in all sorts of despondent attitudes. A dull quiet brooded over the assembly, and Mr. Carleton walked up and down the vacant space. Once he caught an anxious glance from Fleda, and came immediately to her side.
"You need not be troubled about me," he said, with a most genial smile; "I am not suffering — never was farther from it in my life."
Fleda could neither answer nor look.
"There are not many hours of the night to wear out," he said.
"Can't you follow your neighbour's example?"
She shook her head.
"This watching is too hard for you. You will have another headache to-morrow."
"No, perhaps not," she said, with a grateful look up.
"You do not feel the cold now, Elfie?"
"Not at all — not in the least — I am perfectly comfortable — I am doing very well."
He stood still, and the changing lights and shades on Fleda's cheek grew deeper.
"Do you know where we are, Mr. Carleton?"
"Somewhere between a town the name of which I have forgotten, and a place called Quarrenton, I think; and Quarrenton, they tell me, is but a few miles from Greenfield. Our difficulties will vanish, I hope, with the darkness."
He walked again, and Fleda mused, and wondered at herself in the black fox. She did not venture another look, though her eye took in nothing very distinctly but the outlines of that figure passing up and down through the car. He walked perseveringly; and weariness at last prevailed over everything else with Fleda; she lost herself, with her head leaning against the bit of wood between the windows.
The rousing of the great-coats, and the growing gray light, roused her before her uneasy sleep had lasted an hour. The lamps were out, the car was again spotted with two long rows of window-panes, through which the light as yet came but dimly. The morning had dawned at last, and seemed to have brought with it a fresh accession of cold, for everybody was on the stir. Fleda put up her window to get a breath of fresh air, and see how the day looked.
A change of weather had come with the dawn. It was not fine yet. The snowing had ceased, but the clouds hung overhead still, though not with the leaden uniformity of yesterday;
they were higher, and broken into many a soft, gray fold, that promised to roll away from the sky by and by. The snow was deep on the ground; every visible thing lapped in a thick white covering; a still, very grave, very pretty winter landscape, but somewhat dreary in its aspect, to a trainful of people fixed in the midst of it, out of sight of human habitation. Fleda felt that; but only in the abstract — to her it did not seem dreary; she enjoyed the wild, solitary beauty of the scene very much, with many a grateful thought of what might have been. As it was, she left difficulties entirely to others.
As soon as it was light, the various inmates of the strange dormitory gathered themselves up, and set out on foot for Quarrenton. By one of them Mr. Carleton sent an order for a sleigh, which in as short a time as possible arrived, and transported him and Fleda, and Mrs. Renney, and one other ill- bestead woman, safely to the little town of Quarrenton.
CHAPTER XXI.
"Welcome the sour cup of prosperity! Affliction may one day smile again, and till then, sit thee down, sorrow!"
LOVE'S LABOUR LOST.
It had been a wild night, and the morning looked scared.
Perhaps it was only the particular locality, for if ever a place showed bleak and winter-stricken, the little town of Quarrenton was in that condition that morning. The snow overlaid and enveloped everything, except where the wind had been at work; and the wind and the gray clouds seemed the only agencies abroad. Not a ray of sunlight to relieve the uniform sober tints, the universal gray and white, only varied where a black house-roof, partially cleared, or a blacker bare- branched tree, gave it a sharp interruption. There was not a solitary thing that bore an indication of comfortable life, unless the curls of smoke that went up from the chimneys; and Fleda was in no condition to study their physiognomy.
A little square hotel, perched alone on a rising ground, looked the especial bleak and unpromising spot of the place.
It bore, however, the imposing title of the Pocahontas; and there the sleigh set them down.
They were ushered upstairs into a little parlour, furnished in the usual style, with one or two articles a great deal too showy for the place, and a general dearth as to the rest. A lumbering mahogany sofa, that showed as much wood and as little promise as possible, a marble-topped centre-table, chairs in the minority, and curtains minus, and the hearth-rug providently turned bottom upwards. On the centre-table lay a pile of Penny Magazines, a volume of' selections of poetry from various good authors, and a sufficient complement of newspapers. The room was rather cold, but of that the waiter gave a reasonable explanation in the fact that the fire had not been burning long.
Furs, however, might be dispensed with, or Fleda thought so;
and taking off her bonnet, she endeavoured to rest her weary head against the sharp-cut top of the sofa-back, which seemed contrived expressly to punish and forbid all attempts at ease- seeking. The mere change of position was still comparative ease. But the black fox had not done duty yet. Its ample folds were laid over the sofa, cushion, back, and all, so as at once to serve for pillow and mattress; and Fleda being gently placed upon it, laid her face down again upon the soft fur, which gave a very kindly welcome not more to the body than to the mind. Fleda almost smiled as she felt that. The furs were something more than a pillow for her cheek — they were the soft image of somewhat for her mind to rest on. But entirely exhausted, too much for smiles or tears, though both were near, she resigned herself as helplessly as an infant to the feeling of rest; and, in five minutes, was in a state of dreamy unconsciousness.
Mrs. Renney, who had slept a great part of the night, courted sleep anew in the rocking-chair, till breakfast should be ready; the other woman had found quarters in the lower part of the house; and Mr. Carleton stood still, with folded arms, to read at his leisure the fair face that rested so confidingly upon the black fur of his cloak, looking so very fair in the contrast. It was the same face he had known in time past — the same, with only an alteration that had added new graces, but had taken away none of the old. Not one of the soft outlines had grown hard under Time's discipline: not a curve had lost its grace, or its sweet mobility; and yet the hand of Time had been there; for on brow and lip, and cheek and eyelid, there was that nameless, grave composure, which said touchingly, that hope had long ago clasped hands with submission. And, perhaps, that if hope's anchor had not been well placed, ay, even where it could not be moved, the storms of life might have beaten even hope from her ground, and made a clean sweep of desolation over all she had left. Not the storms of the last few weeks. Mr. Carleton saw and understood their work in the perfectly colourless and thin cheek. But these other finer drawn characters had taken longer to write. He did not know the instrument, but he read the handwriting, and came to his own resolutions therefrom.
Yet if not untroubled, she had remained unspotted by the world; that was as clear as the other. The slight eyebrow sat with its wonted calm purity of outline just where it used; the eyelid fell as quietly; the forehead above it was as unruffled; and if the mouth had a subdued gravity that it had taken years to teach, it had neither lost any of the sweetness, nor any of the simplicity of childhood. It was a strange picture that Mr. Carleton was looking at — strange for its rareness. In this very matter of simplicity, that the world will never leave those who belong to it. Half sitting and half reclining, she had given herself to rest with the abandonment and self-forgetfulness of a child; her attitude had the very grace of a child's unconsciousness; and her face showed that, even in placing herself there, she had lost all thought of any other presence or any other eyes than her own;
even of what her hand and cheek lay upon, and what it betokened. It meant something to Mr. Carleton, too; and if Fleda could have opened her eyes, she would have seen in those that were fixed upon her a happy promise for her future life.
She was beyond making any such observations; and Mrs. Renney gave no interruption to his till the breakfast bell rang.
Mr. Carleton had desired the meal to be served in a private room. But he was met with a speech in which such a confusion of arguments endeavoured to persuade him to be of another mind, that he had at last given way. It was asserted that the ladies would have their breakfast a great deal quicker, and a great deal hotter, with the rest of the company; and in the same breath that it would be a very great favour to the house if the gentleman would not put them to the inconvenience of setting a separate table; the reasons of which inconvenience were set forth in detail, or would have been if the gentleman would have heard them; and desirous especially of haste, on Fleda's account, Mr. Carleton signified his willingness to let the house accommodate itself. Following the bell, a waiter now came to announce and conduct them to their breakfast.
Down the stairs, through sundry narrow turning passages, they went to a long low room at one corner of the house; where a table was spread for a very nondescript company, as it soon proved, many of their last night's companions having found their way thither. The two ladies, however, were given the chief posts at the head, as near as possible to a fiery hot stove, and served with tea and coffee from a neighbouring table, by a young lady in long ringlets, who was there probably for their express honour. But, alas for the breakfast! They might as good have had the comfort of a private room, for there was none other to be had. Of the tea and coffee it might be said, as once it was said of two bad roads — "whichever one you take, you will wish you had taken the other;" the beefsteak was a problem of impracticability;
and the chickens — Fleda could not help thinking, that a well- to-do rooster which she saw flapping his wings in the yard, must, in all probability, be at that very moment endeavouring to account for a sudden breach in his social circle; and if the oysters had been some very fine ladies, they could hardly have retained less recollection of their original circumstances. It was in vain to try to eat or to drink; and Fleda returned to her sofa with even an increased appetite for rest, the more that her head began to take its revenge for the trials to which it had been put the past day and night.
She had closed her eyes again in her old position. Mrs. Renney was tying her bonnet-strings. Mr. Carleton was pacing up and down.
"Aren't you going to get ready, Miss Ringgan?" said the former.
"How soon will the cars be here?" exclaimed Fleda, starting up.
"Presently," said Mr. Carleton; "but," said he, coming up to her and taking her hands — "I am going to prescribe for you again — will you let me?"
Fleda's face gave small promise of opposition.
"You are not fit to travel now. You need some hours of quiet rest before we go any further."
"But when shall we get home?" said Fleda.
"In good time — not by the railroad — there is a nearer way that will take us to Queechy without going through Greenfield.
I have ordered a room to be made ready for you — will you try if it be habitable?"
Fleda submitted; and, indeed, there was in his manner a sort of gentle determination to which few women would have opposed themselves; besides that, her head threatened to make a journey a miserable business.
"You are ill now," said Mr. Carleton. "Cannot you induce your companion to stay and attend you?"
"I don't want her," said Fleda.
Mr. Carleton, however, mooted the question himself with Mrs.
Renney, but she represented to him, though with much deference, that the care of her property must oblige her to go where and when it went. He rang, and ordered the housekeeper to be sent.
Presently after, a young lady in ringlets entered the room, and first taking a somewhat leisurely survey of the company, walked to the window, and stood there looking out. A dim recollection of her figure and air made Fleda query whether she were not the person sent for; but it was several minutes before it came into Mr. Carleton's head to ask if she belonged to the house.
"I do, Sir," was the dignified answer.
"Will you show this lady the room prepared for her. And take care that she wants nothing."
The owner of the ringlets answered not, but turning the front view of them full upon Fleda, seemed to intimate that she was ready to act as her guide. She hinted, however, that the rooms were very _airy_ in winter, and that Fleda would stand a better chance of comfort where she was. But this Fleda would not listen to, and followed her adviser to the half-warmed, and certainly very airy apartment which had been got ready for her. It was probably more owing to something in her own appearance, than to Mr. Carleton's word of admonition on the subject, that her attendant was really assiduous and kind.
"Be you of this country?" she said, abruptly, after her good offices, as Fleda thought, were ended, and she had just closed her eyes.
She opened them again, and said "Yes."
"Well, that aint in the parlour, is he?"
"What?" said Fleda.
"One of our folks?"
"An American, you mean? — No."
"I thought he wa'n't — What is he?"
"He is English."
"Is he your brother?"
"No."
The young lady gave her a good look out of her large dark eyes, and remarking that "she thought they didn't look much like," left the room.
The day was spent by poor Fleda between pain and stupor, each of which acted in some measure to check the other — too much exhausted for nervous pain, to reach the height it sometimes did, while yet that was sufficient to prevent stupor from sinking into sleep. Beyond any power of thought, or even fancy, with only a dreamy succession of images flitting across her mind, the hours passed, she knew not how; that they did pass, she knew from her handmaid in the long curls, who was every now and then coming in to look at her, and give her fresh water; it needed no ice. Her handmaid told her that the cars were gone by — that it was near noon — then, that it was past noon. There was no help for it; she could only lie still and wait; it was long past noon before she was able to move;
and she was looking ill enough yet, when she at last opened the door of the parlour and slowly presented herself.
Mr. Carleton was there alone, Mrs. Renney having long since accompanied her baggage. He came forward instantly, and led Fleda to the sofa, with such gentle, grave kindness, that she could hardly bear it; her nerves had been in an unsteady state all day. A table was set, and partially spread with evidently much more care than the one of the morning, and Fleda sat looking at it, afraid to trust herself to look anywhere else.
For years she had been taking care of others, and now there was something so strange in this feeling of being cared for, that her heart was full. Whatever Mr. Carleton saw or suspected of this, it did not appear. On the contrary, his manner and his talk on different matters was as cool, as quiet, as graceful, as if neither he nor Fleda had anything particular to think of; avoiding even an allusion to whatever might in the least distress her. Fleda thought she had a great many reasons to be grateful to him, but she never thanked him for anything more than at that moment she thanked him for the delicacy which so regarded her delicacy, and put her in a few minutes completely at her ease as she could be.
The refreshments were presently brought, and Fleda was served with them in a way that went, as far as possible, towards making them satisfactory; but, though a great improvement upon the morning, they furnished still but the substitute for a meal. There was a little pause then, after the horses were ordered.
"I am afraid you have wanted my former prescription to-day,"
said Mr. Carleton, after considering the little-improved colour of Fleda's face.
"I have, indeed."
"Where is it?"
Fleda hesitated, and then, in a little confusion, said, she supposed it was lying on Mrs. Evelyn's centre-table.
"How happens that?" said he, smiling.
"Because I could not help it, Mr. Carleton," said Fleda, with no little difficulty; "I was foolish, I could not bring it away."
He understood and was silent.
"Are you fit to bear a long ride in the cold?" he said, compassionately, a few minutes after.
"Oh, yes; it will do me good."
"You have had a miserable day, have you not?"
"My head has been pretty bad," said Fleda, a little evasively.
"Well, what would you have?" said he, lightly; "doesn't that make a miserable day of it?"
Fleda hesitated and coloured, and then, conscious that her cheeks were answering for her, coloured so exceedingly, that she was fain to put both her hands up to hide what they only served the more plainly to show. No advantage was taken. Mr.
Carleton said nothing; she could not see what answer might be in his face. It was only by a peculiar quietness in his tone whenever he spoke to her afterwards that Fleda knew she had been thoroughly understood. She dared not lift her eyes.
They had soon employment enough around her. A sleigh and horses, better than anything else Quarrenton had been known to furnish, were carrying her rapidly towards home, the weather had perfectly cleared off, and in full brightness and fairness the sun was shining upon a brilliant world. It was cold indeed, though the only wind was that made by their progress;
but Fleda had been again unresistingly wrapped in the furs, and was, for the time, beyond the reach of that or any other annoyance. She sat silently and quietly enjoying; so quietly that a stranger might have questioned there being any enjoyment in the case. It was a very picturesque, broken country, fresh covered with snow; and at that hour, late in the day, the lights and shadows were a constantly varying charm to the eye. Clumps of evergreens stood out in full disclosure against the white ground; the bare branches of neighbouring trees in all their barrenness, had a wild prospective or retrospective beauty peculiar to themselves. On the wavy white surface of the meadow land, or the steep hill- sides, lay every variety of shadow in blue and neutral tint;
where they lay not, the snow was too brilliant to be borne.
And afar off, through a heaven, bright and cold enough to hold the canopy over winter's head, the ruler of the day was gently preparing to say good-bye to the world. Fleda's eye seemed to be new set for all forms of beauty, and roved from one to the other as grave and bright as nature itself.
For a little way, Mr. Carleton left her to her musings, and was as silent as she. But then he gently drew her into a conversation that broke up the settled gravity of her face, and obliged her to divide her attention between nature and him, and his part of it he knew how to manage. But though eye and smile constantly answered him, he could win neither to a straightforward bearing.
They were about a mile from Queechy, when Fleda suddenly exclaimed — "Oh, Mr. Carleton, please stop the sleigh!"
The horses were stopped.
"It is only Earl Douglass, our farmer," Fleda said, in explanation: "I want to ask how they are at home?"
In answer to her nod of recognition, Mr. Douglass came to the side of the vehicle; but till he was there, close, gave her no other answer by word or sign; when there, broke forth his accustomed guttural — "How d'ye do?"
"How d'ye do, Mr. Douglass," said Fleda. "How are they all at home?"
"Well, there aint nothin' new among 'em, as I've heerd on,"
said Earl, diligently though stealthily, at the same time qualifying himself to make a report of Mr. Carleton. "I guess they'll be glad to see you. _I_ be."
"Thank you, Mr. Douglass. How is Hugh?"
"He aint nothin' different from what he's been for a spell back — at least I ain't heerd that he was. Maybe he is, but if he is, I ha'n't heerd speak of it, and if he was, I think I should ha' heerd speak of it. He was pretty bad a spell ago — about when you went away — but he's been better sen. So they say. I ha'n't seen him. Well Flidda," he added, with somewhat of a sly gleam in his eye, "do you think you're going to make up your mind to stay to hum this time?"
"I have no immediate intention of running away, Mr. Douglass,"
said Fleda, her pale cheeks turning rose as she saw him looking curiously up and down the edges of the black fox. His eye came back to hers with a good- humoured intelligence that she could hardly stand.
"It's time you was back," said he. "Your uncle's to hum, but he don't do me much good, whatever he does to other folks, or himself nother, as far as the farm goes; there's that corn —"
"Very well, Mr. Douglass," said Fleda, "I shall be at home now, and I'll see about it."
"_Very_ good!" said Earl, as he stepped back, "Queechy can't get along without you, that's no mistake."
They drove on a few minutes in silence.
"Aren't you thinking, Mr. Carleton," said Fleda, "that my countrymen are a strange mixture?"
"I was not thinking of them at all at this moment. I believe such a notion has crossed my mind."
"It has crossed mine very often," said Fleda.
"How do you read them? What is the basis of it?"
"I think, the strong self-respect which springs from the security and importance that republican institutions give every man. But," she added, colouring, "I have seen very little of the world, and ought not to judge."
"I have no doubt you are quite right," said Mr. Carleton, smiling. "But don't you think an equal degree of self-respect may consist with giving honour where honour is due?"
"Yes," said Fleda, a little doubtfully, "where religion and not republicanism is the spring of it."
"Humility and not pride," said he. "Yes, you are right."
"My countrymen do yield honour where they think it is due,"
said Fleda, "especially where it is not claimed. They must give it to reality, not to pretension. And, I confess, I would rather see them a little rude in their independence, than cringing before mere advantages of external position — even for my own personal pleasure."
"I agree with you, Elfie, putting, perhaps, the last clause out of the question."
"Now, that man," said Fleda, smiling at his look — "I suppose his address must have struck you as very strange; and yet there was no want of respect under it. I am sure he has a true thorough respect, and even regard for me, and would prove it on any occasion."
"I have no doubt of that."
"But it does not satisfy you?"
"Not quite. I confess I should require more from any one under my control."
"Oh, nobody is under control here," said Fleda. "That is, I mean, individual control, unless so far as self-interest comes in. I suppose that is all-powerful here as elsewhere."
"And the reason it gives less power to individuals is, that the greater freedom of resources makes no man's interest depend so absolutely on one other man. That is a reason you cannot regret. No, your countrymen have the best of it, Elfie.
But, do you suppose that this is a fair sample of the whole country?"
"I dare not say that," said Fleda. "I am afraid there is not so much intelligence and cultivation everywhere. But I am sure there are many parts of the land that will bear a fair comparison with it."
"It is more than I would dare say for my own land."
"I should think" — Fleda suddenly stopped.
"What?" — said Mr. Carleton, gently.
"I beg your pardon, Sir — I was going to say something very presumptuous."
"You cannot," he said in the same tone.
"I was going to say," said Fleda, blushing, "that I should think there might be a great deal of pleasure in raising the tone of mind and character among the people, as one could who had influence over a large neighbourhood."
His smile was very bright in answer.
"I have been trying that, Elfie, for the last eight years."
Fleda's eye looked now eagerly in pleasure and in curiosity for more. But he was silent.
"I was thinking a little while ago," he said, "of the time, once before, when I rode here with you — when you were beginning to lead me to the problem I have been trying to work out ever since. When I left you in Paris, I went to resolve with myself the question, What I had to do in the world? Your little Bible was my invaluable help. I had read very little of it when I threw aside all other books; and my problem was soon solved. I saw that the life has no honour nor value which is not spent to the glory of God. I saw the end I was made for — the happiness I was fitted for — the dignity to which even a fallen creature may rise, through his dear Redeemer and Surety."
Fleda's eyes were down now. Mr. Carleton was silent a moment, watching one or two bright witnesses that fell from them.
"The next conclusion was easy — that my work was at home — I have wanted my good fairy," Mr. Carleton went on, smiling.
"But I hope she will be contented to carry the standard of Christianity, without that of republicanism."
"But Christianity tends directly to republicanism, Mr.
Carleton," said Fleda, trying to laugh.
"I know that," said he, smiling — "and I am willing to know it. But the leaven of truth is one thing, and the powder train of the innovator is another."
Fleda sat thinking that she had very little in common with the layers of powder trains. She did not know the sleigh was passing Deepwater lake, till Mr. Carleton said — "I am glad, my dear Elfie, for your sake, that we are almost at the end of your journey."
"I should think you might be glad for your own sake, Mr.
Carleton."
"No — my journey is not ended —"
"Not?"
"No — it will not be ended till I get back to New York, or rather till I find myself here again — I shall make very little delay there —"
"But you will not go any further to-night?" said Fleda, her eye this time meeting his fully.
"Yes — I must take the first train to New York. I have some reason to expect my mother by this steamer."
"Back to New York!" said Fleda. "Then taking care of me has just hindered you in your business."
But even as she spoke, she read the truth in his eye, and her own fell in confusion.
"My business?" said he, smiling; — "you know it now, Elfie. I arrived at Mrs. Evelyn's just after you had quitted it, intending to ask you to take the long-talked-of drive; and learned, to my astonishment, that you had left the city, and, as Edith kindly informed me, under no better guardianship than that in which I found you. I was just in time to reach the boat."
"And you ere in the boat night before last?"
"Certainly."
"I should have felt a great deal easier if I had known that,"
said Fleda.
"So should I," said he; "but you were invisible, till I discerned you in the midst of a crowd of people before me in the car."
Fleda was silent, till the sleigh stopped, and Mr. Carleton had handed her out.
"What's going to be done with this here trunk?" said heir driver, trying a tug at one handle.
"I will send somebody down to help you with it," said Fleda.
"It is too heavy for one alone."
"Well, I reckon it is," said he. "I guess you didn't know I was a cousin, did you?"
"No," said Fleda.
"I believe I be."
"Who are you?"
"I am Pierson Barnes. I live to Quarrenton for a year back.
Squire Joshua Springer's your uncle, aint he?"
"Yes, my father's uncle."
"Well, he's mine too. His sister's my mother."
"I'll send somebody to help you, Mr. Barnes."
She took Mr. Carleton's arm, and walked half the way up to the house without daring to look at him.
"Another specimen of your countrymen," he said, smiling.
There was nothing but quiet amusement in the tone, and there was not the shadow of anything else in his face. Fleda looked, and thanked him mentally, and drew breath easier. At the house-door he made a pause.
"You are coming in, Mr. Carleton?"
"Not now."
"It is a long drive to Greenfield, Mr. Carleton; — you must not turn away from a country-house till we have shown ourselves unworthy to live in it. You will come in and let us give you something more substantial than those Quarrenton oysters. Do not say no," she said, earnestly, as she saw a refusal in his eye — "I know what you are thinking of, but they do not know that you have been told anything — it makes no difference."
She laid her gentle detaining hand, as irresistible in its way as most things, upon his arm, and he followed her in.
Only Hugh was in the sitting-room, and n a great easy-chair by the fire. It struck to Fleda's heart; but there was no time but for a flash of thought. He had turned his face and saw her. Fleda meant to have controlled herself and presented Mr.
Carleton properly, but Hugh started up; he saw nothing but herself, and one view of the ethereal delicacy of his face made Fleda for a moment forget everything but him. They were in each other's arms, and then still as death. Hugh was unconscious that a stranger was there, and though Fleda was very conscious that one was there who was no stranger — there was so much in both hearts, so much of sorrow and joy, and gratitude and tenderness, on the one part and on the other, so much that even if they had been alone lips could only have said silently — that for a little while they kissed each other and wept in a passionate attempt to speak what their hearts were too full of.
Fleda at last whispered to Hugh that somebody else was there, and turned to make, as well as she might, the introduction.
But Mr. Carleton did not need it, and made his own with that singular talent which in all circumstances, wherever he chose to exert it, had absolute power. Fleda saw Hugh's countenance change, with a kind of pleased surprise, and herself stood still under the charm for a minute; then she recollected she might be dispensed with. She took up her little spaniel, who was in an agony of gratulation at her feet, and went out into the kitchen.
"Well, do you mean to say you are here at last?" said Barby, her gray eyes flashing pleasure as she came forward to take the half hand which, owing to King's monopoly, was all Fleda had to give her. "Have you come home to stay, Fleda?"
"I am tired enough to be quiet," said Fleda. "But, dear Barby, what have you got in the house? — I want supper as quickly as it can be had."
"Well, you do look dreadful bad," said Barby eyeing her. "Why, there aint much particular, Fleda; nobody's had any heart to eat lately; I thought I might a'most as well save myself the fuss of getting victuals. Hugh lives like a bird, and Mis'
Rossitur aint much better, and I think all of 'em have been keeping their appetites till you came back; 'cept Philetus and me; we keep it up pretty well. Why, you're come home hungry, aint you?"
"No, not I," said Fleda; "but there's a gentleman here that came with me that must have something before he goes away again. What have you, Barby?"
"Who is he?" said Barby.
"A friend that took care of me on the way — I'll tell you about it; but, in the meantime, supper, Barby."
"Is he a New Yorker, that one must be curious for?"
"As curious as you like," said Fleda, "but he is not a New Yorker."
"Where _is_ he from, then?" said Barby, who was busily putting on the tea-kettle.
"England."
"England!" said Barby, facing about. "Oh, if he's an Englishman, I don't care for him, Fleda."
"But you care for me," said Fleda, laughing; "and for my sake don't let our hospitality fail to somebody who has been very kind to me, if he is an Englishman; and he is in haste to be off."
"Well, I don't know what we're a-going to give him," said Barby, looking at her. "There aint much in the pantry besides cold pork and beans, that Philetus and me made our dinner on — they wouldn't have it in there, and eat nothing but some pickerel the doctor sent down — and cold fish aint good for much."
"None of them left uncooked?"
"Yes, there's a couple — he sent a great lot — I guess he thought there was more in the family — but two aint enough to go round; they're little ones."
"No, but put them down, and I'll make an omelette. Just get the things ready for me, Barby, will you, while I run up to see aunt Lucy. The hens have begun to lay?"
"La, yes — Philetus fetches in lots of eggs — he loves 'em, I reckon — but you aint fit this minute to do a thing but rest, Fleda."
"I'll rest afterwards. Just get the things ready for me, Barby, and an apron; and the table — I'll be down in a minute.
And, Barby, grind some coffee, will you?"
But, as she turned to run upstairs, her uncle stood in her way, and the supper vanished from Fleda's head. His arms were open, and she was silently clasped in them, with so much feeling on both sides, that thought, and well nigh strength, for anything else on her part was gone. His smothered words of deep blessing overcame her. Fleda could do nothing but sob, in distress, till she recollected Barby. Putting her arms round his neck, then she whispered to him that Mr. Carleton was in the other room, and shortly explained how he came to be there, and begged her uncle would go in and see him till supper should be ready. Enforcing this request with a parting kiss on his cheek, she ran off up stairs. Mr. Rossitur looked extremely moody and cloudy for a few minutes, and then went in and joined his guest. Mrs. Rossitur and her daughter could not be induced to show themselves.
Little Rolf, however, had no scruples of any kind. He presently edged himself into the room to see the stranger, whom he no sooner saw than, with a joyous exclamation, he bounded forward to claim an old friend.
"Why, Mr. Carleton," exclaimed Mr. Rossitur, in surprise, "I was not aware that this young gentleman had the honour of your acquaintance."
"But I have," said Rolf.
"In London, Sir, I had that pleasure," said Mr. Carleton.
"I think it was _I_ had the pleasure," said Rolf, pounding one hand upon Mr. Carleton's knee.
"Where is your mother?"
"She wouldn't come down," said Rolf; "but I guess she will when she knows who is here" — And he was darting away to tell her, when Mr. Carleton, within whose arms he stood, quietly restrained him, and told him he was going away presently, but would come again and see his mother another time.
"Are you going back to England, Sir?"
"By and by."
"But you will come here again first?"
"Yes, if Mr. Rossitur will let me."
"Mr. Carleton knows he commands his own welcome," said that gentleman, somewhat stately. "Go and tell your aunt Fleda that tea is ready, Rolf."
"She knows," said Rolf. "She was making an omelette — I guess it was for this gentleman."
Whose name he was not clear of yet. Mr. Rossitur looked vexed, but Hugh laughed, and asked if his aunt gave him leave to tell that. Rolf entered forthwith into discussion on this subject, while Mr. Carleton, who had not seemed to hear it, engaged Mr.
Rossitur busily in another, till the omelette and Fleda came in. Rolf's mind, however, was ill at ease.
"Aunt Fleda," said he, as soon as she had fairly taken her place at the head of the table, "would you mind my telling that you made the omelette for this gentleman?"
Fleda cast a confused glance, first at the person in question and then round the table; but Mr. Carleton, without looking at her, answered instantly — "Don't you understand, Rolf, that the same kindness which will do a favour for a friend, will keep him in ignorance of it?"
Rolf pondered a moment, and then burst forth — "Why, Sir, wouldn't you like it as well for knowing she made it?"
It was hardly in human gravity to stand this. Fleda herself laughed, but Mr. Carleton, as unmoved as possible, answered him, "Certainly not," and Rolf was nonplussed.
The supper was over. Hugh had left the room, and Mr. Rossitur had before that gone out to give directions about Mr.
Carleton's horses. He and Fleda were left alone.
"I have something against you, fairy," said he, lightly, taking her hand, and putting it to his lips. "You shall not again do me such honour as you have done me to-day — I did not deserve it, Elfie."
The last words were spoken half reproachfully. Fleda stood a moment motionless, and then by some curious revulsion of feeling, put both her hands to her face and burst into tears.
She struggled against them, and spoke almost immediately — "You will think me very foolish, Mr. Carleton — I am ashamed of myself — but I have lived here so long in this way — my spirits have grown so quieted by different things, that it seems, sometimes, as if I could not bear anything — I am afraid" — "Of what, my dear Elfie?"
But she did not answer, and her tears came again.
"You are weary and spent," he said, gently, repossessing himself of one of her hands. "I will ask you another time what you are afraid of, and rebuke all your fears."
"I deserve nothing but rebuke now," said Fleda.
But her hand knew, by the gentle and quiet clasp in which it lay, that there was no disposition to give it.
"Do not speak to me for a minute," she said, hastily, as she heard some one coming.
She went to the window, and stood there looking out, till Mr.
Carleton came to bid her good-bye.
"Will you permit me to say to Mrs. Evelyn," he said, in a low tone, "that you left a piece of your property in her house, and have commissioned me to bring it you?"
"Yes," said Fleda, hesitating, and looking a little confused;
"but — will you let me write a note instead, Mr. Carleton?"
"Certainly! — but what are you thinking of, Elfie? what grave doubt is lying under your brow?"
All Fleda's shadows rolled away before that clear, bright eye.
"I have found by experience," she said, smiling a little, but looking down, "that whenever I tell my secret thoughts to anybody, I have some reason afterwards to be sorry for it."
"You shall make me an exception to your rule, however, Elfie."
Fleda looked up, one of her looks, half questioning, half fearing, and then answered, a little hesitating — "I was afraid, Sir, that if you went to Mrs. Evelyn's on that errand — I was afraid you would show them you were displeased."
"And what then?" said he, quietly.
"Only — that I wanted to spare them what always gives me a cold chill."
"Gives you!" said Mr. Carleton.
"No, Sir — only by sympathy — I thought my agency would be the gentlest."
"I see I was right," she said, looking up, as he did not answer; "but they don't deserve it — not half so much as you think. They talk — they don't know what. I am sure they never meant half they said — never meant to annoy me with it, I mean — and I am sure they have a true love for me — they have shown it in a great many ways. Constance, especially, never showed me anything else. They have been very kind to me; and as to letting me come away as they did, I suppose they thought I was in a greater hurry to get home than I really was; and they would very likely not have minded travelling so themselves; I am so different from them, that they might in many things judge me by themselves, and yet judge far wrong."
Fleda was going on, but she suddenly became aware that the eye to which she was speaking had ceased to look at the Evelyns, even in imagination, and she stopped short.
"Will you trust me, after this, to see Mrs. Evelyn without the note?" said he, smiling.
But Fleda gave him her hand, very demurely, without raising her eyes again, and he went.
Barby, who had come in to clear away the table, took her stand at the window to watch Mr. Carleton drive off. Fleda had retreated to the fire. Barby looked in silence till the sleigh was out of sight.
"Is he going back to England now?" she said, coming back to the table.
"No."
Barby gathered a pile of plates together, and then inquired — "Is he going to settle in America?"
"Why, no, Barby! What makes you ask such a thing?"
"I thought he looked as if he had dressed himself for a cold climate," said Barby, drily.
Fleda sat down by Hugh's easy-chair, and laid her head on his breast.
"I like your Mr. Carleton very much," Hugh whispered, after a while.
"Do you?" said Fleda, a little wondering at Hugh's choice of that particular pronominal adjective.
"Very much indeed. But he has changed, Fleda."
"Yes —in some things — some great things."
"He says he is coming again," said Hugh.
Fleda's heart beat. She was silent.
"I am very glad," repeated Hugh, "I like him very much. But you won't leave me, Fleda, will you?"
"Leave you?" said Fleda, looking at him.
"Yes," said Hugh, smiling, and drawing her head down again: "I always thought what he came over here for. But you will stay with me while I want you, Fleda?"
"While you want me!" said Fleda, again.
"Yes — it won't be long."
"What won't be long?"
"I," said Hugh, quietly. "Not long. I am very glad I shall not leave you alone, dear Fleda — very glad! — promise me you will not leave me any more."
"Don't talk so, dear Hugh!"
"But it is true, Fleda," said Hugh, gently. "I know it. I sha'n't be here, but a little while. I am so glad you are come home, dear Fleda! You will not let anybody take you away till I am gone first?"
Fleda drew her arm close around Hugh's neck, and was still — still even to his ear — for a good while. A hard battle must be fought, and she must not be weak, for his sake, and for everybody's sake. Others of the family had come, or were coming into the room. Hugh waited till a short breath, but freer drawn, told him he might speak.
"Fleda," he whispered.
"What?"
"I am very happy. I only want your promise about that."
"I can't talk to you, Hugh."
"No; but promise me."
"What?"
"That you will not let anybody take you away while I want you."
"I am sure he would not ask it," said Fleda, hiding her cheeks and eyes at once in his breast.
CHAPTER XXII.
"Do you think I shall not love a sad Pamela as well as a joyful!"
SIDNEY.
Mr. Carleton came back without his mother; she had chosen to put off her voyage till spring. He took up his quarters at Montepoole, which, far though it was, was yet the nearest point where his notions of ease could have freedom enough.