The Project Gutenberg eBook of Heroic Romances of Ireland, Translated into English Prose and Verse — Volume 2 This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
Title: Heroic Romances of Ireland, Translated into English Prose and Verse — Volume 2 Author: Arthur Herbert Leahy Release date: May 1, 2004 [eBook #5679] Most recently updated: June 29, 2026 Language: English Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/5679 Credits: This eBook was produced by John B. Hare and Carrie Lorenz *** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEROIC ROMANCES OF IRELAND, TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PROSE AND VERSE — VOLUME 2 *** HEROIC ROMANCES OF IRELAND TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PROSE AND VERSE, WITH PREFACE, SPECIAL INTRODUCTIONS AND NOTES BY A. H. LEAHY IN TWO VOLUMES VOL. II @@{Redactors Note: In the original book the 'Literal Translation' is printed on facing pages to the poetic translation. In this etext the literal translation portions have been collated after the poetic translation, for the sake of readability. Hence the page numbers are not sequential--JBH} PREFACE TO VOL. II It seems to have been customary in ancient Ireland to precede by shorter stories the recital of the Great Tain, the central story of the Irish Heroic Age. A list of fourteen of these "lesser Tains," three of which are lost, is given in Miss Hull's "Cuchullin Saga"; those preserved are the Tain bo Aingen, Dartada, Flidais, Fraich, Munad, Regamon, Regamna, Ros, Ruanadh, Sailin, and Ere. Of these, five only have been edited, viz. the Tain bo Dartada, Flidais, Fraich, Regamon, and Regamna; all these five are given in this volume.
The last four tales are all short, and perhaps are more truly "preludes" (remscela) than the Tain bo Fraich, which has indeed enough of interest in itself to make it an independent tale, and is as long as the four put together. All the five tales have been rendered into verse, with a prose literal translation opposite to the verse rendering, for reasons already given in the preface to the first volume. A short introduction, describing the manuscript authority, is prefixed to each; they all seem to go back in date to the best literary period, but appear to have been at any rate put into their present form later than the Great Tain, in order to lead up to it. A possible exception to this may be found at the end of the Tain bo Flidais, which seems to give a different account of the end of the war of Cualgne, and to claim that Cuchulain was defeated, and that Connaught gained his land for its allies. It may be mentioned that the last four tales are expressly stated in the text to be "remscela" to the Great Tain.
INTRODUCTION IN VERSE When to an Irish court of old Came men, who flocked from near and far To hear the ancient tale that told Cuchulain's deeds in Cualgne's War;
Oft, ere that famous tale began, Before their chiefest bard they hail, Amid the throng some lesser man Arose, to tell a lighter tale;
He'd fell how Maev and Ailill planned Their mighty hosts might best be fed, When they towards the Cualgne land All Irelands swarming armies led;
How Maev the youthful princes sent To harry warlike Regamon, How they, who trembling, from her went, His daughters and his cattle won;
How Ailill's guile gained Darla's cows, How vengeful fairies marked that deed;
How Fergus won his royal spouse Whose kine all Ireland's hosts could feed;
How, in a form grotesque and weird, Cuchulain found a Power Divine;
Or how in shapes of beasts appeared The Magic Men, who kept the Swine;
Or how the rowan's guardian snake Was roused by order of the king;
Or how, from out the water, Fraech To Finnabar restored her ring.
And though, in greater tales, they chose Speech mired with song, men's hearts to sway, Such themes as these they told in prose, Like speakers at the "Feis" to-day.
To men who spake the Irish tongue That form of Prose was pleasing well, While other lands in ballads sung Such tales as these have loved to tell:
So we, who now in English dress These Irish tales would fain And seek their spirit to express, Have set them down in ballad verse;
And, though to Celts the form be strange, Seek not too much the change to blame;
'Tis but the form alone we change;
The sense, the spirit rest the same.
CONTENTS THE PRELUDES TO THE RAID OF CUALGNE TAIN BO FRAICH - Page 1 THE RAID FOR DARTAID'S CATTLE - Page 69 THE RAID FOR THE CATTLE OF REGAMON - Page 83 THE DRIVING OF THE CATTLE OF FLIDAIS - Page 101 THE APPARITION OF THE GREAT QUEEN TO CUCHULAIN - Page 127 APPENDIX IRISH TEXT AND LITERAL TRANSLATION OF PART OF THE COURTSHIP OF ETAIN - Page 143 TAIN BO FRAICH INTRODUCTION The Tain bo Fraich, the Driving of the Cattle of Fraech, has apparently only one version; the different manuscripts which contain it differing in very small points; most of which seem to be due to scribal errors.
Practically the tale consists of two quite separate parts. The first, the longer portion, gives the adventures of Fraech at the court of Ailill and Maev of Connaught, his courtship of their daughter, Finnabar, and closes with a promised betrothal. The second part is an account of an expedition undertaken by Fraech to the Alps "in the north of the land of the Long Beards," to recover stolen cattle, as well as his wife," who is stated by O'Beirne Crowe, on the authority of the "Courtship of Trebland" in the Book of Fermoy, to have been Trebland, a semi-deity, like Fraech himself. Except that Fraech is the chief actor in both parts, and that there is one short reference at the end of the second part to the fact that Fraech did, as he had promised in the first part, join Ailill and Maev upon the War of Cualnge, there is no connection between the two stories. But the difference between the two parts is not only in the subject-matter; the difference in the style is even yet more apparent. The first part has, I think, the most complicated plot of any Irish romance, it abounds in brilliant descriptions, and, although the original is in prose, it is, in feeling, highly poetic. The second part resembles in its simplicity and rapid action the other "fore tales" or preludes to the War of Cualnge contained in this volume, and is of a style represented in English by the narrative ballad.
In spite of the various characters of the two parts, the story seems to have been regarded as one in all the manuscripts which contain it; and the question how these two romances came to be regarded as one story becomes interesting. The natural hypothesis would be that the last part was the original version, which was in its earlier part re-written by a man of genius, possibly drawing his plot from some brief statement that Finnabar was promised to Fraech in return for the help that he and his recovered cattle could give in the Great War; but a difficulty, which prevents us from regarding the second part as an original legend, at once comes in. The second part of the story happens to contain so many references to nations outside Ireland that its date can be pretty well fixed. Fraech and his companions go, over the sea from Ulster, i.e. to Scotland; then through "north Saxon-land" to the sea of Icht (i.e. the sea of Wight or the English Channel); then to the Alps in the north of the land of the Long-Beards, or Lombards. The Long-Beards do not appear in Italy until the end of the sixth century; the suggestion of North Saxon-Land reaching down to the sea of Wight suggests that there was then a South Saxon-Land, familiar to an Irish writer, dating this part of the story as before the end of the eighth century, when both Saxons and Long-Beards were overcome by Charlemagne. The second part of the story is, then, no original legend, but belongs to the seventh or eighth century, or the classical period; and it looks as if there were two writers, one of whom, like the author of the Egerton version of Etain, embellished the love-story part of the original legend, leaving the end alone, while another author wrote an account of the legendary journey of the demi-god Fraech in search for his stolen cattle, adding the geographical and historical knowledge of his time.
The whole was then put together, like the two parts of the Etain story;
the difference between the two stories in the matter of the wife does not seem to have troubled the compilers.
The oldest manuscript authority for the Tain bo Fraich is the Book of Leinster, written before 1150. There are at least two other manuscript authorities, one; in Egerton, 1782 (published by Professor Kuno Meyer in the Zeitschrift für Celt. Philologie, 1902); the other is in MS. XL., Advocates' Library, Edinburgh (published in the Revue Celtique, Vol.
XXIV.). Professor Meyer has kindly allowed me to copy his comparison of these manuscripts and his revision of O'Beirne Crowe's translation of the Book of Leinster text. The text of the literal translation given here follows, however, in the main O'Beirne Crowe's translation, which is in the Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy for 1870; a few insertions are made from the other MSS.; when so made the insertion is indicated by a note.
For those who may be interested in the subsequent history of Fraech, it may be mentioned that he was one of the first of the Connaught champions to be slain by Cuchulain in the war of Cualnge; see Miss Faraday's translation (Grimm Library, page 35).
PERSONS IN THE STORY MORTALS Ailill, King of Connaught.
Medb (or Maev), Queen of Connaught.
Findbar (or Finnabar), their daughter.
Froech (or Fraech), (pronounced Fraych); son of a Connaught man and a fairy mother.
Conall Cernach (Conall the Victorious), champion of Ulster.
Two Irish women, in captivity in the Alps, north of Lombardy.
Lothar (or Lothur), a follower of Fraech.
Bicne, a follower of Conall.
IMMORTALS Befind, Fraech's fairy mother.
Boand (pronounced like "owned"), sister to Befind; Queen of the Fairies.
Three fairy harpers.
TAIN BO FRAICH THE RAID FOR THE CATTLE OF FRAECH Now the news of the love of that maid to Fraech, at his home where he dwelt, was brought, And he called his folk, and with all he spoke, and for speech with the maid he sought:
And they counselled him thus: "Let a message from thee be sent to thy fairy kin To entreat their aid when we seek that maid; a boon we may chance to win:
For the wondrous robes of the fairy land, and for gifts from the fairies plead;
And sure thy mother's sister's hand will give to thee all thy need."
To Mag Breg,[FN#1] where his mother's sister dwelt, to Boand he away hath gone, And she gave to him mantles of dark black-blue, like a beetle's back they shone:
Four dark-grey rings in each cloak she gave were sewn, and a brooch shone, bright With the good red gold in each mantle's fold; she gave tunics pale and white, And the tunics were bordered with golden loops, that forms as of beasts displayed;
And a fifty she added of well-rimmed shields, that of silver white were made.
[FN#1] Pronounced Maw Brayg.
Then away they rode, in each hero's hand was a torch for a kingly hall, For studs of bronze, and of well-burned gold, shone bright on the spears of all;
On carbuncle sockets the spears were set, their points with jewels blazed;
And they lit the night, as with fair sunlight, as men on their glory gazed.
By each of the fifty heroes' side was a sword with a hilt of gold;
And a soft-grey mare was for each to ride, with a golden curb controlled;
At each horse's throat was a silver plate, and in front of that plate was swung, With a tinkling sound to the horse's tread, a bell with a golden tongue.
on each steed was a housing of purple hide, with threads of silver laced, And with spiral stitch of the silver threads the heads of beasts were traced, And each housing was buckled with silver and gold: of findruine[FN#2] was made the whip For each rider to hold, with a crook of gold where it came to the horse man's grip.
[FN#2] Pronounced "find-roony," the unknown "white-bronze" metal.
By their sides, seven chase-hounds were springing At leashes of silver they strained, And each couple a gold apple, swinging On the fetter that linked them, sustained:
And their feet with bronze sheaths had been guarded, As if greaves for defence they had worn, Every hue man hath seen, or hath fancied, By those chase-hounds in brilliance was borne.
Seven trumpeters strode on the road before, with colour their cloaks were bright, And their coats, that shone with the gauds they wore, flashed back as they met the light;
On trumpets of silver and gold they blew, and sweet was the trumpets'
sound, And their hair, soft and yellow, like fairy threads, shone golden their shoulders round.
Three jesters marched in the van, their-crowns were of silver, by gilt concealed, And emblems they. carried of quaint device, engraved on each jester's shield;
They had staves which with crests were adorned, and ribs down their edges in red bronze ran;
Three harp-players moved by the jesters' sides, and each was a kingly man.
All these were the gifts that the fairy gave, and gaily they made their start, And to Croghan's[FN#3] hold, in that guise so brave, away did the host depart.
[FN#3] Pronounced Crow-han.
On the fort stands a watchman to view them, And thus news down to Croghan he calls:
"From yon plain comes, in fulness of numbers, A great army to Croghan's high walls;
And, since Ailill the throne first ascended, Since the day we hailed Maev as our Queen, Never army so fair nor so splendid Yet hath come, nor its like shall be seen."
"'Tis strange," said he," as dipped in wine, So swims, so reels my head, As o'er me steals the breath divine Of perfume from them shed."
"A fair youth," said he, "forth with them goeth, And the grace of such frolicsome play, And such lightness in leap as he showeth Have I seen not on earth till to-day:
For his spear a full shot's length he flingeth, Yet the spear never reacheth to ground, For his silver-chained hounds follow after, In their jaws is the spear ever found!"
The Connaught hosts without the fort To see that glory rushed:
Sixteen within, of baser sort, Who gazed, to death were crushed.
To the fort came the youths, from their steeds they leapt, for the steeds and the stabling cared, And they loosed the hounds that in leash they kept, for the hunt were the hounds prepared;
Seven deer, seven foxes and hares, they chased to the dun on Croghan's plain, Seven boars they drave, on the lawn in haste the game by the youths was slain:
With a bound they dashed into Bree, whose flood by the lawns of Croghan flows;
Seven otters they caught in its stream, and brought to a hill where the gateway rose.
'Twas there that Fraech and the princes sat at the castle-gate to rest, And the steward of Croghan with Fraech would speak, for such was the king's behest:
Of his birth it was asked, and the men he led all truth to the herald spake:
"It is Idath's son who is here," they said, and they gave him the name of Fraech.
To Ailill and Maev went the steward back of the stranger's name to tell;
"Give him welcome," said they: "Of a noble race is that youth, and I know it well;
Let him enter the court of our house," said the king, the gateway they opened wide;
And the fourth of the palace they gave to Fraech, that there might his youths abide.
Fair was the palace that there they found, Seven great chambers were ranged it round;
Right to the walls of the house they spread, Facing the hall, where the fire glowed red:
Red yew planks, that had felt the plane, Dappled the walls with their tangled grain:
Rails of bronze at the side-walls stood, Plates of bronze had made firm the wood, Seven brass bolts to the roof-tree good Firmly the vaulting tied.
All that house had of pine been made, Planks, as shingles, above were laid;
Sixteen windows the light let pass, Each in a frame of the shining brass:
High through the roof was the sky seen bright;
Girder of brass made that opening tight, Under the gap it was stretched, and light Fell on its gleaming side.
All those chambers in splendour excelling, The midmost of all in the ring, Rose a room, set apart as the dwelling Of Queen Maev, and of Ailill the king.
Four brass columns the awning supported For their couch, there was bronze on the wall;
And two rails, formed of silver, and gilded, In that chamber encircled it all:
In the front, to mid-rafters attaining, Rose in silver a wand from the floor;
And with rooms was that palace engirdled, For they stretched from the door to the door.
'Twas there they went to take repose, On high their arms were hung;
And down they sank, and welcome rose, Acclaimed by every tongue.
By the queen and the king they were welcome made, the strangers they turned to greet;
And their courtesy graciously Fraech repaid: "'Twas thus we had hoped to meet."
"Not for boasting to-day are ye come!" said Maev; the men for the chess she set:
And a lord of the court in the chess-man sport by Fraech in a match was met.
'Twas a marvellous board of findruine fair was prepared, when they played that game, Four handles, and edges of gold it had, nor needed they candles' flame;
For the jewels that blazed at the chess-board's side, a light, as from lamps, would yield;
And of silver and gold were the soldiers made, who engaged on that mimic field.
"Get ye food for the chiefs!" said the king; said Maev, "Not yet, 'tis my will to stay, To sit with the strangers, and here with Fraech in a match at the chess to play!"
"Let thy game be played!" said Ailill then, "for it pleaseth me none the less:"
And Queen Maev and Fraech at the chess-board sate, and they played at the game of chess.
Now his men, as they played, the wild beasts late caught were cooking, they thought to feed;
And said Ailill to Fraech, "Shall thy harpmen play?" "Let them play,"
said Fraech, "indeed:"
Now those harpers were wondrous men, by their sides they had sacks of the otter's skin, And about their bodies the sacks were tied, and they carried their harps within, With stitches of silver and golden thread each case for a harp was sewed;
And, beneath the embroidery gleaming red, the shimmer of rubies showed!
The skin of a roe about them in the middle, it was as white as snow;
black-grey eyes in their centre. Cloaks of linen as white as the tunic of a swan around these ties.[FN#4] Harps of gold and silver and bronze, with figures of serpents and birds, and hounds of gold and silver: as they moved those strings those figures used to run about the men all round.
[FN#4] This is the Egerton version, which is clearly right here. The Book of Leinster gives: "These figures accordingly used to run," &c., leaving out all the first part of the sentence, which is required to make the meaning plain.
They play for them then so that twelve of the people[FN#5] of Ailill and Medb die with weeping and sadness.
[FN#5] The Book of Leinster omits "of Ailill and Medb."
Gentle and melodious were the triad, and they were the Chants of Uaithne[FN#6] (Child-birth). The illustrious triad are three brothers, namely Gol-traiges (Sorrow-strain), and Gen-traiges (Joy-strain), and Suan-traiges (Sleep-strain). Boand from the fairies is the mother of the triad:
[FN#6] Pronounced something like Yew-ny.
At every one of the harpers' waists was girded the hide of a roe, And black-grey spots in its midst were placed, but the hide was as white as snow;
And round each of the three of them waved a cloak, as white as the wild swan's wings:
Gold, silver, and bronze were the harps they woke; and still, as they touched the strings, The serpents, the birds, and the hounds on the harps took life at the harps' sweet sound, And those figures of gold round the harpmen rose, and floated in music round.
Then they played, sweet and sad was the playing, Twelve of Ailill's men died, as they heard;
It was Boand[FN#7] who foretold them that slaying, And right well was accomplished her word.
[FN#7] Pronounced with sound of "owned."
'Tis the three Chants of Child-Birth Give names to those Three;
Of the Harp of the Dagda[FN#8] The children they be.
[FN#8] The Dagda seems to have been the chief god of the old Celtic mythology.
To those harpers a fairy Is mother, of yore To that Harp, men call Child-Birth, Queen Boand the three bore.
They are three noble brothers, And well are they known;
They are kindly and gentle, And tuneful of tone.
One is Joy-Song, one Sorrow's, One, "Song that gives Sleep,"
And the Harp's strains, their father's, Remembered they keep.
For when Boand was at bearing, Came Sorrow the first, From the Harp, its strings tearing With cry, Sorrow burst.
Then there came to her pleasure For birth of a boy;
And a sweet smiling measure The Harp played, 'twas Joy.
And she swooned in her anguish, For hard the third birth:
From the Harp, her pains soothing, Sleep's strain came on earth.
Then from Boand passed her slumber, And, "Uaithne,"[FN#9] she cried, Thy three sons, thou sharp Child-Birth, I take to my side.
[FN#9] Pronounced something like Yew-ny.
Cows and women by Ailill And Maev shall be slain;
For on these cometh Sorrow, And Joy, and Sleep's strain:
Yea, and men, who these harpers, Thy children, shall hear, By their art to death stricken, Shall perish in fear."
Then the strains died away in the palace, The last notes seemed to sink, and to cease:
"It was stately," said Fergus, "that music."
And on all came a silence, and peace.
Said Fraech, "The food divide ye!
Come, bring ye here the meat!"
And down to earth sank Lothar, On floor he set his feet;
He crouched, on haunches sitting, The joints with sword he split;
On bones it fell unerring, No dainty part he hit!
Though long with sword he hewed, and long Was meat by men supplied, His hand struck true; for never wrong Would Lothar meat divide.
Three days at the chess had they played; three nights, as they sat at the game, had gone:
And they knew not the night for the sparkling light from the jewels of Fraech that shone;
But to Maev turned Fraech, and he joyously cried, "I have conquered thee well at the chess!
Yet I claim not the stake at the chess-board's side, lest thy palace's wealth be less."
"For no lengthier day have I sat in such play," said Maev, "since I here first came."
"And well may the day have seemed long," said Fraech, "for three days and three nights was the game!"
Then up started Maev, and in shame she blushed that the chiefs she had failed to feed;
To her husband, King Ailill, in wrath she rushed: "We have both done a goodly deed!
For none from our stores hath a banquet brought for the youths who are strangers here!"
And said Ailill, "In truth for the play was thy thought, and to thee was the chess more dear."
"We knew not that darkness had come," said Maev, "'tis not chess thou should'st thus condemn;
Though the day had gone, yet the daylight shone from the heart of each sparkling gem;
Though the game we played, all could meal have made, had men brought of the night advice, But the hours sped away, and the night and the day have approached and have fled from us thrice!"
"Give command," said the king, "that those wailing chants, till we give them their food, be stilled."
And food to the hands of each they gave, and all with the meat were filled;
And all things merrily went, for long the men with a feast were fed, For, as feasting they sat, thrice rose the day, thrice night above earth was spread.
They brought Fraech, when that banquet was ended, To the House of Debate, which was near, And they asked of his errand: "In friendship, For a visit," said Fraech, "am I here!"
"And 'twas joy that we felt, when receiving This your host," said the king, "ye have brought Much of pleasure to all, and with grieving, When ye go, shall your presence be sought!"
"Then," said Fraech, "for a week we abide here."
For two weeks in that dun they abode:
And the Connaught men pressed round to view them, As each eve home from hunting they rode.
Yet Fraech was sad, with Findabar A word he sought in vain;
Though he in truth from home so far Had come that word to gain.
Fraech, as night was ending, Sprang from out his bed;
Sought the brook, intending There to lave his head.
There King Ailill's daughter Stood, and there her maid:
They that hour from water Sought the cleansing aid.
"Stay," he cried, and speaking Caught the maiden's hand;
"Thee alone as seeking, I have reached this land:
Here am I who sought thee, Stay, and hear me woo!"
"Ah! thy speech hath brought me Joy," she said, "most true;
Yet, thy side if nearing, What for thee can I?"
"Maid!" he cried, "art fearing Hence with me to fly?"
"Flight I hold disloyal,"
Answered she in scorn;
"I from mother royal, I to king was born;
What should stay our wedding?
None so mean or poor Thou hast seemed, nor dreading Kin of mine; be sure:
I will go! 'tis spoken, Thou beloved shalt be!
Take this ring as token, Lent by Maev to me!
'Twas my mother who bid me to save it, For the ring she in secret would hide;
'Tis as pledge of our love that I gave it, As its pledge it with thee should abide.
Till that ring we can freely be showing I will tell them I put it astray!"
And, the love of each other thus knowing, Fraech and Finnabar went on their way.
"I have fear," said the king, "that with Fraech yon maid to his home as his wife would fly;
Yet her hand he may win, if he rides on the Raid with his kine when the time draws nigh."
Then Fraech to the Hall of Debate returned, and he cried: "Through Some secret chink Hath a whisper passed?" and the king replied, "Thou would'st fit in that space, I think!"
"Will ye give me your daughter?" said Fraech: said the king, "In sight of our hosts she goes;
If, as gift to suffice for her marriage price, thy hand what I ask bestows."
"I will give thee what price thou dost name," said Fraech, "and now let its sum be told!"'
"Then a sixty steeds do I claim," said the king, "dark-grey, and with bits of gold;
And twelve milch-cows, from their udders shall come the milk in a copious stream, And by each of the cows a white calf shall run; bright red on its ears shall gleam;
And thou, with thy harpers and men, shalt ride by my side on the Cualgne[FN#10] Raid, And when all thy kine driven here shall stand, shall the price of her hand be paid!"
[FN#10] Pronounced Kell-ny.
Now I swear by the edge of my sword," said Fraech, "I swear by my arms and shield, I would give no such pledge, even Maev to take, were it her thou wert fain to yield!"
And he went from the House of Debate, but Maev with Ailill bent low in plot:
All around us our foes," said the king, "shall close, if Finnabar stays here not;
Many kings of Erin, who seek that maid, shall hear of her borne away, And in wrath they will rush on our land; 'twere best that Fraech we devise to slay;
Ere that ruin he bring, let us make our spring, and the ill yet unwrought arrest."
"It were pity such deed should be done," said Maev, "and to slay in our house our guest!
'Twill bring shame on us ever." "No shame to our house," said King Ailill, "that death shall breed!"
(And he spake the words twice)--"but now hear my advice, how I plan we should do this deed."
All the plot had been planned; to their house at last King Ailill and Maev through the doorway passed;
And the voice of the king uprose:
"'Tis now that the hounds should their prey pursue, Come away to the hunt who the hounds would view;
For noon shall that hunting close."
So forth went they all, on the chase intent, And they followed till strength of the hounds was spent, And the hunters were warm; and to bathe they went Where the river of Croghan flows.
And, "'Tis told me," said Ailill, "that Fraech hath won A great fame for the feats he in floods hath done:
Wilt thou enter these streams by our side that run?
We are longing to see thee swim!"
And said Fraech: "Is it good then indeed thy stream?
And said Ailill: "Of danger no need to dream, For many a youth from the Connaught Court In its current hath bathed, and hath swum it in sport, Nor of any who tried have we heard report That ill hath been found by him!"
Then Fraech from his body his garments stripped, And he sprang down the bank, and he swiftly slipped In the stream: and the king's glance fell On a belt, left by Fraech on the bank; the king Bent low; in the purse saw his daughter's ring, And the shape of the ring could tell.
"Come hither, O Maev," Ailill softly cried;
And Queen Maev came up close to her husband's side "Dost thou know of that ring?" in the purse she spied The ring, and she knew it well.
Then Ailill the ring from the purse withdrew, And away from the bank the fair gem he threw;
And the ring, flashing bright, through the air far flew, To be lost in the flood's swift swell.
And Fraech saw the gem as it brightly flashed, And a salmon rose high, at the light it dashed, And, as back in the stream with the ring he splashed, At the fish went Fraech with a spring:
By its jole was the salmon secured, and thrown To a nook in the bank, that by few was known;
And unnoticed he threw it, to none was it shown As it fell to the earth, with the ring.
And now Fraech from the stream would be going:
But, "Come not," said the king, "to us yet:
Bring a branch from yon rowan-tree, showing Its fair berries, with water-drops wet."
Then Fraech, swimming away through the water, Brake a branch from the dread rowan-tree, And a sigh came from Ailill's fair daughter;
"Ah! how lovely he seemeth," said she.
Fair she found him, swimming Through that pool so black Brightly gleamed the berries, Bound athwart his back.
White and smooth his body, Bright his glorious hair;
Eyes of perfect greyness, Face of men most fair:
Soft his skin, no blemish, Fault, nor spot it flawed;
Small his chin, and steady, Brave his brow, and broad.
Straight he seemed, and stainless;
Twixt his throat and chin Straying scarlet berries Touched with red his skin.
Oft, that sight recalling, Findabar would cry:
"Ne'er was half such beauty, Naught its third came nigh!"
To the bank he swam, and to Ailill was thrown, with its berries, the tree's torn limb:
"Ah! how heavy and fair have those clusters grown; bring us more," and he turned to swim;
The mid-current was reached, but the dragon was roused that was guard to that rowan-tree;
And it rose from the river, on Fraech it rushed: "Throw a sword from the bank!" cried he.
And no man on the bank gave the sword: they were kept by their fear of the queen and the king;
But her clothes from her Finnabar stripped, and she leapt in the river his sword to bring.
And the king from above hurled his five-barbed spear; the full length of a shot it sped:
At his daughter it flew, and its edge shore through two tresses that crowned her head:
And Fraech in his hand caught the spear as it fell, and backward its point he turned.
And again to the land was the spear launched well: 'twas a feat from the champions learned.
Though the beast bit his side as that spear was cast, yet fiercely the dart was flung, Through the purple robe of the king it passed, through the tunic that next him clung!
Then up sprang the youths of the court, their lord in danger they well might deem, But the strong hand of Fraech had closed firm on the sword, and Finnabar rose from the stream.
Now with sword in his hand, at the monster's head hewed Fraech, on its side it sank, And he came from the river with blade stained red, and the monster he dragged to the bank.
Twas then Bree's Dub-lind in the Connaught land the Dark Water of Fraech was named, From that fight was it called, but the queen and the king went back to their dun, ashamed!
"It is noble, this deed we have done!" said Maev: "'Tis pitiful,"
Ailill cried:
"For the hurt of the man I repent, but to her, our daughter, shall woe betide!
On the morrow her lips shall be pale, and none shall be found to aver that her guilt, When the sword for his succour to Fraech she gave, was the cause why her life was spilt!
Now see that a bath of fresh bacon broth be prepared that shall heal this prince, And bid them with adze and with axe the flesh of a heifer full small to mince:
Let the meat be all thrown in the bath, and there for healing let Fraech be laid!"
And all that he ordered was done with care; the queen his command obeyed.
Then arose from Fraech's trumpets complaining, As his men travelled back to the dun;
Their soft notes lamentation sustaining, And a many their deaths from them won;
And he well knew its meaning;
And, "Lift me, my folk,"
He cried, "surely that keening From Boand's women broke:
My mother, the Fairy, is nigh."
Then they raised him, and bore him Where wild rose the sound;
To his kin they restored him;
His women pressed round:
And he passed from their sight out of Croghan;
For that night from earth was he freed, And he dwelt with his kin, the Sid-Dwellers In the caverns of Croghan's deep Sid.[FN#11] [FN#11] Pronounced Sheed; Sid is the fairy mound.
All at nine, next morrow, Gazed, for back he came, Round their darling pressing Many a fairy dame:
Brave he seemed, for healing All his wounds had got;
None could find a blemish, None a sear or spot.
Fifty fairies round him, Like in age and grace;
Like each form and bearing;
Like each lovely face.
All in fairy garments, All alike were dressed;
None was found unequal;
None surpassed the rest.
And the men who stood round, as they neared them, Were struck with a marvellous awe;
They were moved at the sight, and they feared them, And hardly their breath they could draw.
At the Liss all the fairies departed, But on Fraech, as they vanished, they cried:
And the sound floated in of their wailing, And it thrilled through the men, and they sighed.
Then first that mournful measure, "The Ban-Shee[FN#12] Wail," was heard;
All hearts with grief and pleasure That air, when harped, hath stirred.
[FN#12] Spelt "Ban Side," the fairy women.
To the dun came Fraech, and the hosts arose, and welcome by all was shown:
For it seemed as if then was his birth among men, from a world to the earth unknown!
Up rose for him Maev and King Ailill, their fault they confessed, and for grace they prayed, And a penance they did, and for all that assault they were pardoned, and peace was made.
And now free from all dread, they the banquet spread, the banqueting straight began:
But a thought came to Fraech, and from out of his folk he called to his side a man.
"Now hie thee," he said, "to the river bank, a salmon thou there shalt find;
For nigh to the spot where in stream I sank, it was hurled, and 'twas left behind;
To Finnabar take it, and bid her from me that the salmon with skill she broil:
In the midst of the fish is the ring: and none but herself at the task must toil;
And to-night, as I think, for her ring they call ": then he turned to the feast again, And the wine was drunk, and the revellers sunk, for the fumes of it seized their brain, And music and much of delights they had; but the king had his plans laid deep, "Bring ye all of my jewels," he cried-on the board they were poured in a dazzling heap.
"They are wonderful, wonderful!" cried they all: "Call Finnabar!" said the king;
And his daughter obeyed, and her fifty maids stood round in a lovely ring.
My daughter," said Ailill, "a ring last year I gave thee, is't here with thee yet?
Bring it hither to show to the chiefs, and anon in thy hand shall the gem be set."
"That jewel is lost," said the maid, "nor aught of the fate of the ring I know!"
Then find it," said Ailill, "the ring must be brought, or thy soul from thy limbs must go!"
"Now, nay!" said they all, "it were cruel That such fate for such fault should be found:
Thou hast many a fair-flashing jewel In these heaps that lie scattered around!"
And said Fraech: "Of my jewels here glowing Take thy fill, if the maid be but freed;
'Tis to her that my life I am owing, For she brought me the sword in my need."
"There is none of thy gems that can aid her,"
Said Ailill, "nor aught thou canst give;
There is one thing alone that shall save her;
If the ring be restored, she shall live!
Said Finnabar; "Thy treasure To yield no power is mine:
Do thou thy cruel pleasure, For strength, I know, is thine."
"By the god whom our Connaught land haileth, I swear," answered Ailill the king, "That the life on thy lips glowing faileth, If thou place in my hand not the ring!"
And that hard," he laughed softly, "the winning Of that jewel shall be, know I well;
They who died since the world had beginning Shall come back to the spot where they fell Ere that ring she can find, and can bear it To my hand from the spot where 'twas tossed, And as knowing this well, have I dared her To restore what for aye hath been lost!"
"No ring for treasure thus despised,"
She said, "exchanged should be;
Yet since the king its worth hath prized, I'll find the gem for thee!"
Not thus shalt thou fly," said the king, "to thy maid let the quest of the ring be bid!"
And his daughter obeyed, and to one whom she sent she told where the ring was hid:
"But," Finnabar cried, "by my country's god I swear that from out this hour, Will I leave this land, and my father's hand shall no more on my life have power, And no feasting shall tempt me to stay, no draughts of wine my resolve shall shake!"
"No reproach would I bring, if as spouse," said the king, "thou a groom from my stalls would'st take!
But that ring must be found ere thou goest! "Then back came her maid, and a dish she bore:
And there lay a salmon well broiled, as sauce with honey 'twas garnished o'er:
By the daughter of Ailill herself with skill had the honey-sweet sauce been made.
And high on the breast of the fish, the ring of gold that they sought was laid.
King Ailill and Maev at the ring gazed hard; Fraech looked, in his purse he felt:
Now it seemeth," he said, "'twas to prove my host that I left on the bank my belt, And Ailill now I challenge All truth, as king to tell;
What deed his cunning fashioned, And what that ring befell."
"There is naught to be hidden," said Ailill;
"It was mine, in thy purse though it lay And my daughter I knew as its giver:
So to river I hurled it away.
Now Fraech in turn I challenge By life and honour's claim:
Say how from yon dark water That ring to draw ye came."
"There is naught to be hidden," he answered, "The first day that I came, on the earth, Near the court round thy house, was that jewel;
And I saw all its beauty and worth:
In my purse then I hid it; thy daughter, Who had lost it, with care for it sought;
And the day that I went to that water Was the news of her search to me brought:
And I asked what reward she would give me, If the gem in her hand should be placed;
And she answered that I, if I found it, For a year by her love should be graced.
But not then could the ring be delivered:
For afar in my chamber it lay:
Till she gave me the sword in the river, We met not again on that day.
'Twas then I saw thee open My purse, and take the ring:
I watched, and towards the water That gem I saw thee fling:
I saw the salmon leaping, The ring it caught, and sank:
I came behind, and seized it;
And brought the fish to bank.
Then I wrapped it up close in my mantle;
And 'twas hid from inquisitive eyes;
And in Finnabar's hand have I placed it:
And now there on the platter it lies!"
Now all who this or that would know To ask, and praise began:
Said Finnabar, "I'll never throw My thoughts on other man!"
Now hear her word," her parents cried, "And plight to her thy troth, And when for Cualgne's[FN#13] kine we ride Do thou redeem thine oath.
[FN#13] Pronounced Kell-ny.
And when with kine from out the east Ye reach our western land;
That night shall be thy marriage feast;
And thine our daughter's hand."
"Now that oath will I take," answered back to them Fraech, "and the task ye have asked will do!"
So he tarried that night till the morning's light; and they feasted the whole night through;
And then homewards bound, with his comrades round, rode Fraech when the night was spent, And to Ailill and Maev an adieu he gave, and away to their land they went.
TAIN BO FRAICH Part I LITERAL TRANSLATION FRAECH, son of Idath of the men of Connaught, a son he to Befind from the Side: a sister she to Boand. He is the hero who is the most beautiful that was of the men of Eriu and of Alba, but he was not long-lived. His mother gave him twelve cows out of the Sid (the fairy mound), they are white-eared. He had a good housekeeping till the end of eight years without the taking of a wife. Fifty sons of kings, this was the number of his household, co-aged, co-similar to him all between form and instruction. Findabair, daughter of Ailill and Medb, loves him for the great stories about him. It is declared to him at his house.
Eriu and Alba were full of his renown and the stories about him.
To Fraech[FN#14] was Idath[FN#15] father, A Connaught man was he:
And well we know his mother Who dwells among the Shee;[FN#16] Befind they call her, sister To Boand,[FN#17] the Fairy Queen;
And Alba ne'er, nor Erin, Such grace as Fraech's hath seen.
Yet wondrous though that hero's grace, His fairy lineage high, For years but few his lovely face Was seen by human eye.
[FN#14] Pronounced Fraych.
[FN#15] Pronounced Eeda.
[FN#16] The Fairies.
[FN#17] Pronounced with the sound of "owned."
Fraech had twelve of white-eared fairy-cattle, 'Twas his mother those cattle who gave:
For eight years in his home he dwelt wifeless, And the state of his household was brave;
Fifty princes, whose age, and whose rearing, And whose forms were as his, with him played;
And his glory filled Alba and Erin Till it came to the ears of a maid:
For Maev and Ailill's[FN#18] lovely child, Fair Findabar, 'twas said, By tales of Fraech to love beguiled, With Fraech in love would wed.
[FN#18] Pronounced Al-ill.
After this going to a dialogue with the maiden occurred to him; he discussed that matter with his people.
"Let there be a message then sent to thy mother's sister, so that a portion of wondrous robing and of gifts from the Side (fairy folk) be given thee from her." He goes accordingly to the sister, that is to Boand, till he was in Mag Breg, and he carried away fifty dark-blue cloaks, and each of them was like the back of a black chafer,[FN#19] and four black-grey, rings on each cloak, and a brooch of red gold on each cloak, and pale white tunics with loop-animals of gold around them. And fifty silver shields with edges, and a candle of a king's-house in the hand of them (the men), and fifty studs of findruine[FN#20] on each of them (the lances), fifty knobs of thoroughly burned gold on each of them; points (i.e. butt-ends) of carbuncle under them beneath, and their point of precious stones. They used to light the night as if they were the sun's rays.
[FN#19] The Book of Leinster gives "fifty blue cloaks, each like findruine of art."
[FN#20] Pronounced "find-roony," the unknown "white-bronze" metal.
And there were fifty gold-hilted swords with them, and a soft-grey mare under the seat of each man, and bits of gold to them;
a plate of silver with a little bell of gold around the neck of each horse. Fifty caparisons[FN#21] of purple with threads of silver out of them, with buckles of gold and silver and with head-animals (i.e.
spiral ornaments). Fifty whips of findruine, with a golden hook on the end of each of them. And seven chase-hounds in chains of silver, and an apple of gold between each of them. Greaves of bronze about them, by no means was there any colour which was not on the hounds.
[FN#21] The word for caparisons is "acrann," the usual word for a shoe. It is suggested that here it may be a caparison of leather:
"shoes" seem out of place here. See Irische Texts, iii.
Seven trumpeters with them with golden and silver trumpets with many coloured garments, with golden fairy-yellow heads of hair, with shining tunics. There were three jesters before them with silver diadems under gilding. Shields with engraved emblems (or marks of distinction) with each of them; with crested staves, with ribs of bronze (copper-bronze) along their sides. Three harp-players with a king's appearance about each of them opposite to these.[FN#22] They depart for Cruachan with that appearance on them.
[FN#22] The word for caparisons is "acrann," the usual word for a shoe. It is suggested that here it may be a caparison of leather:
"shoes" seem out of place here. See Irische Texts, iii. 2. p. 531.
The watchman sees them from the dun when they had come into the plain of Cruachan. "A multitude I see," he says, "(come) towards the dun in their numbers. Since Ailill and Maev assumed sovereignty there came not to them before, and there shall not come to them, a multitude, which is more beautiful, or which is more splendid. It is the same with me that it were in a vat of wine my head should be, with the breeze that goes over them.
"The manipulation and play that the young hero who is in it makes--I have not before seen its likeness. He shoots his pole a shot's discharge from him; before it reaches to earth the seven chase-hounds with their seven silver chains catch it."
At this the hosts come from the dun of Cruachan to view them. The people in the dun smother one another, so that sixteen men die while viewing them.
They alight in front of the dun. They tent their steeds, and they loose the chase-hounds. They (the hounds) chase the seven deer to Rath-Cruachan, and seven foxes, and seven hares, and seven wild boars, until the youths kill them in the lawn of the dun. After that the chase-hounds dart a leap into Brei; they catch seven otters. They brought them to the elevation in front of the chief rath. They (Fraech and his suite) sit down there.
A message comes from the king for a parley with them. It is asked whence they came, they name themselves according to their true names, "Fraech, son of Idath this," say they. The steward tells it to the king and queen. "Welcome to them," say Ailill and Maev; "It is a noble youth who is there," says Ailill, "let him come into the Liss (outer court)." The fourth of the house is allotted to them. This was the array of the house, a seven fold order in it; seven apartments from fire to side-wall in the house all round. A rail (or front) of bronze to each apartment; a partitioning of red yew under variegated planing all.
Three plates of bronze in the skirting of each apartment. Seven plates of brass from the ceiling (?) to the roof-tree in the house.
Of pine the house was made; it is a covering of shingle it had externally. There were sixteen windows in the house, and a frame of brass, to each of them; a tie of brass across the roof-light. Four beams of brass on the apartment of Ailill and Medb, adorned all with bronze, and it in the exact centre of the house. Two rails of silver around it under gilding. In the front a wand of silver that reached the middle rafters of the house. The house was encircled all round from the door to the other.[FN#23] [FN#23] It should be noted that it is not certain whether the word "imdai," translated apartments, really means "apartments" or "benches."
The weight of opinion seems at present to take it as above.
They hang up their arms in that house, and they sit, and welcome is made to them.
"Welcome to you," say Ailill and Medb. "It is that we have come for,"
says Fraech. "It shall not be a journey for boasting[FN#24] this,"
says Medb, and Ailill and Medb arrange the chess-board after that.
Fraech then takes to the playing of chess with a man of their (?) people.
[FN#24] This is the rendering in the Yellow Book of Lecan, considered by Meyer to be the true reading. The Book of Leinster text gives "aig-baig," a word of doubtful meaning. The Eg. MS. has also a doubtful word.
It was a beauty of a chess-board. A board of findruine in it with four ears[FN#25] and edges of gold. A candle of precious stones at illuminating for them. Gold and silver the figures that were upon the table. "Prepare ye food for the warriors," said Ailill. "Not it is my desire," said Medb, but to go to the chess yonder against Fraech."
"Get to it, I am pleased," said Ailill, and they play the chess then, and Fraech.
[FN#25] The "ears" were apparently handles shaped like ears. The same word is used for the rings in the cloaks, line 33 above.
His people were meanwhile at cooking the wild animals. "Let thy harpers play for us," says Ailill to Fraech. "Let them play indeed!"
says Fraech. A harp-bag[FN#26] of the skins of otters about them with their adornment of ruby (or coral), beneath their adornment of gold and silver.
[FN#26] Meyer translates this: "the concave part of the harp."
It is from the music which Uaithne, the Dagda's harp, played that the three are named. The time the woman was at the bearing of children it had a cry of sorrow with the soreness of the pangs at first: it was smile and joy it played in the middle for the pleasure of bringing forth the two sons: it was a sleep of soothingness played the last son, on account of the heaviness of the birth, so that it is from him that the third of the music has been named.
Boand awoke afterwards out of the sleep. "I accept," she says, "thy three sons O Uaithne of full ardour, since there is Suan-traide and Gen-traide, and Gol-traide on cows and women who shall fall by Medb and Ailill, men who shall perish by the hearing of art from them."
They cease from playing after that in the palace: "It is stately it has come," says Fergus. "Divide ye to us," says Fraech to his people, "the food, bring ye it into the house." Lothur went on the floor of the house: he divides to them the food. On his haunches he used to divide each joint with his sword, and he used not to touch the food part: since he commenced dividing, he never hacked the meat beneath his hand.
They were three days and three nights at the playing of the chess on account of the abundance of the precious stones in the household of Fraech. After that Fraech addressed Medb. "It is well I have played against thee (i.e. have beaten thee)," he says, "I take not away thy stake from the chess-board that there be not a decay of hospitality for thee in it."
"Since I have been in this dun this is the day which I deem longest in it ever," says Medb. "This is reasonable," says Fraech, "they are three days and three nights in it." At this Medb starts up. It was a shame with her that the warriors were without food. She goes to Ailill: she tells it to him. "A great deed we have done," said she, "the stranger men who have come to us to be without food." "Dearer to thee is playing of the chess," says Ailill. "It hinders not the distribution to his suite throughout the house. They have been three days and three nights in it but that we perceived not the night with the white light of the precious stones in the house." "Tell them,"
says Ailill, "to cease from the lamenting until distribution is made to them." Distribution is then made to them, and things were pleasing to them, and they stayed three days and three nights in it after that over the feasting.
It is after that Fraech was called into the house of conversation, and it is asked of him what brought him. "A visit with you," said he, "is pleasing to me." "Your company is indeed not displeasing with the household," said Ailill, "your addition is better than your diminution."
"We shall stay here then," says Fraech, "another week." They stay after that till the end of a fortnight in the dun, and they have a hunt every single day towards the dun. The men of Connaught used to come to view them.
It was a trouble with Fraech not to have a conversation with the daughter: for that was the profit that had brought him. A certain day he starts up at the end of night for washing to the stream. It is the time she had gone and her maid for washing. He takes her hand. "Stay for my conversing," he says; "it is thou I have come for." "I am delighted truly," says the daughter; "if I were to come, I could do nothing for thee." "Query, wouldst thou elope with me?" he says.
"I will not elope," says she, "for I am the daughter of a king and a queen. There is nothing of thy poverty that you should not get me (i.e. thy poverty is not so great that thou art not able to get me) from my family; and it shall be my choice accordingly to go to thee, it is thou whom I have loved. And take thou with thee this ring," says the daughter, "and it shall be between us for a token. My mother gave it to me to put by, and I shall say that I put it astray." Each of them accordingly goes apart after that.
"I fear," says Ailill, "the eloping of yon daughter with Fraech, though she would be given to him on solemn pledge that he would come towards us with his cattle for aid at the Spoil." Fraech goes to them to the house of conversation. "Is it a secret (cocur, translated "a whisper"
by Crowe) ye have?" says Fraech. "Thou wouldest fit in it," says Ailill.
"Will ye give me your daughter?" says Fraech. "The hosts will clearly see she shall be given," says Ailill, "if thou wouldest give a dowry as shall be named." "Thou shalt have it," says Fraech. "Sixty black-grey steeds to me, with their bits of gold to them, and twelve milch cows, so that there be milked liquor of milk from each of them, and an ear-red, white calf with each of them; and thou to come with me with all thy force and with thy musicians for bringing of the cows from Cualgne; and my daughter to be given thee provided thou dost come" (or as soon as[FN#27] thou shalt come). "I swear by my shield, and by my sword, and by my accoutrement, I would not give that in dowry even of Medb." He went from them out of the house then. Ailill and Medb hold a conversation. "It shall drive at us several of the kings of Erin around us if he should carry off the daughter. What is good is, let us dash after him, and let us slay him forthwith, before he may inflict destruction upon us." "It is a pity this," says Medb, "and it is a decay of hospitality for us." "It shall not be a decay of hospitality for us, it shall not be a decay of hospitality for us, the way I shall prepare it."
[FN#27] This is Thurneysen's rendering ("Sagen aus dem alten Irland,"
p. 121).
Ailill and Medb go into the palace. "Let us go away," says Ailill, that we may see the chase-hounds at hunting till the middle of the day, and until they are tired." They all go off afterwards to the river to bathe themselves.
"It is declared to me," says Ailill, "that thou art good in water.
Come into this flood, that we may see thy swimming." "What is the quality of this flood?" he says. "We know not anything dangerous in it," says Ailill, "and bathing in it is frequent." He strips his clothes off him then, and he goes into it, and he leaves his girdle above. Ailill then opens his purse behind him, and the ring was in it.
Ailill recognises it then. "Come here, O Medb," says Ailill. Medb goes then. "Dost thou recognise that?" says Ailill. "I do recognise,"
she says. Ailill flings it into the river down.
Fraech perceived that matter. He sees something, the salmon leaped to meet it, and caught it in his mouth. He (Fraech) gives a bound to it, and he catches its jole, and he goes to land, and he brings it to a lonely[FN#28] spot on the brink of the river. He proceeds to come out of the water then. "Do not come," says Ailill, "until thou shalt bring me a branch of the rowan-tree yonder, which is on the brink of the river: beautiful I deem its berries." He then goes away, and breaks a branch off the trees and brings it on his back over the water. The remark of Find-abair was: "Is it not beautiful he looks?" Exceedingly beautiful she thought it to see Fraech over a black pool: the body of great whiteness, and the hair of great loveliness, the face of great beauty, the eye of great greyness; and he a soft youth without fault, without blemish, with a below-narrow, above-broad face; and he straight, blemishless; the branch with the red berries between the throat and the white face. It is what Find-abair used to say, that by no means had she seen anything that could come up to him half or third for beauty.
[FN#28]"Hidden spot" (Windisch After that he throws the branches to them out of the water. "The berries are stately and beautiful, bring us an addition of them." He goes off again until he was in the middle of the water. The serpent catches him out of the water. "Let a sword come to me from you," he says; and there was not on the land a man who would dare to give it to him through fear of Ailill and Medb. After that Find-abair strips off her clothes, and gives a leap into the water with the sword. Her father lets fly a five-pronged spear at her from above, a shot's throw, so that it passes through her two tresses, and that Fraech caught the spear in his hand. He shoots the spear into the land up, and the monster in his side. He lets it fly with a charge of the methods of playing of championship, so that it goes through the purple robe and through the tunic (? shirt) that was about Ailill.
At this the youths who were about Ailill rise to him. Find-abair goes out of the water and leaves the sword in Fraech's hand, and he cuts the head off the monster, so that it was on its side, and he brought the monster with him to land. It is from it is Dub-lind Fraech in Brei, in the lands of the men of Connaught. Ailill and Medb go to their dun afterwards.
"A great deed is what we have done," says Medb. "We repent," says Ailill, "of what we have done to the man; the daughter however," he says, "her lips shall perish [common metaphor for death] to-morrow at once, and it shall not be the guilt of bringing of the sword that shall be for her. Let a bath be made by you for this man, namely, broth of fresh bacon and the flesh of a heifer to be minced in it under adze and axe, and he to be brought into the bath." All that thing was done as he said. His trumpeters then before him to the dun. They play then until thirty of the special friends of Ailill die at the long-drawn (or plaintive) music. He goes then into the dun, and he goes into the bath. The female company rise around him at the vat for rubbing, and for washing his head. He was brought out of it then, and a bed was made. They heard something, the lament-cry on Cruachan. There were seen the three times fifty women with crimson tunics, with green head-dresses, with brooches of silver on their wrists.
A messenger is sent to them to learn what they had bewailed. "Fraech, son of Idath," says the woman, "boy-pet of the king of the Side of Erin." At this Fraech heard their lament-cry.
Thirty men whom King Ailill loved dearly By that music were smitten to die;
And his men carried Fraech, and they laid him In that bath, for his healing to lie.
Around the vat stood ladies, They bathed his limbs and head;
From out the bath they raised him, And soft they made his bed.
Then they heard a strange music;
The wild Croghan "keen";
And of women thrice fifty On Croghan were seen.
They had tunics of purple, With green were they crowned;
On their wrists glistened silver, Where brooches were bound.
And there neared them a herald To learn why they wailed;
"'Tis for Fraech," was their answer, "By sickness assailed;
'Tis for Fraech, son of Idath,[FN#29] Boy-darling is he Of our lord, who in Erin Is king of the Shee!"[FN#30] And Fraech heard the wail in their cry;
[FN#29] Pronounced Eeda.
[FN#30] The Fairies.
"Lift me out of it," he says to his people; "this is the cry of my mother and of the women of Boand." He is lifted out at this, and he is brought to them. The women come around him, and bring him from them to the Sid of Cruachan (i.e. the deep caverns, used for burial at Cruachan).
They saw something, at the ninth hour on the morrow he comes, and fifty women around him, and he quite whole, without stain and without blemish; of equal age (the women), of equal form, of equal beauty, of equal fairness, of equal symmetry, of equal stature, with the dress of women of the fairies about them so that there was no means of knowing of one beyond the other of them. Little but men were suffocated around them. They separate in front of the Liss.[FN#31] They give forth their lament on going from him, so that they troubled[FN#32] the men who were in the Liss excessively. It is from it is the Lament-cry of the Women of the Fairies with the musicians of Erin.
[FN#31] The Liss is the outer court of the palace.
[FN#32] "Oo corastar tar cend," "so that they upset, or put beside themselves." Meyer takes literally, "so that they fell on their backs"
(?) He then goes into the dun. All the hosts rise before him, and bid welcome to him, as if it were from another world he were coming.
Ailill and Medb arise, and do penance to him for the attack they had made at him, and they make peace. Feasting commenced with them then at once. Fraech calls a servant of his suite:
"Go off," he says, "to the spot at which I went into the water. A salmon I left there--bring it to Find-abair, and let herself take charge over it; and let the salmon be well broiled by her, and the ring is in the centre of the salmon. I expect it will be asked of her to-night." Inebriety seizes them, and music and amusement delight them. Ailill then said: "Bring ye all my gems to me." They were brought to him then, so that the were before him. "Wonderful, wonderful," says every one. "Call ye Find-abair to me," he says.
Find-abair goes to him, and fifty maidens around her. "O daughter,"
says Ailill, "the ring I gave to thee last year, does it remain with thee? Bring it to me that the warriors may see it. Thou shalt have it afterwards." "I do not know," she says, "what has been done about it."
"Ascertain then," says Ailill, "it must be sought, or thy soul must depart from thy body."
"It is by no means worth," say the warriors, "there is much of value there, without that." "There is naught of my jewels that will not go for the maid," says Fraech, "because she brought me the sword for pledge of my soul."
"There is not with thee anything of gems that should aid her unless she returns the ring from her," says Ailill.
"I have by no means the power to give it," says the daughter, "what thou mayest like do it in regard to me." "I swear to the god to whom my people swear, thy lips shall be pale (literally, shall perish) unless thou returnest it from thee," says Ailill. "It is why it is asked of thee, because it is impossible; for I know that until the people who have died from the beginning of the world. Come, it comes not out of the spot in which it was flung." "It shall not come for a treasure which is not appreciated,"[FN#33] says the daughter, "the ring that is asked for here, I go that I may bring it to thee, since it is keenly it is asked." "Thou shalt not go," says Ailill; "but let one go from thee to bring it."
[FN#33] This is Windisch's rendering (Irische Texte, I. p. 677: s.v.
main).
The daughter sends her maid to bring it.
"I swear to the god to whom my territories swear, if it shall be found, I shall by no means be under thy power any longer though I should be at great drinking continually." (?)[FN#34] "I shall by no means prevent you from doing that, namely even if it were to the groom thou shouldst go if the ring is found," says Ailill. The maid then brought the dish into the palace, and the broiled salmon on it, and it dressed under honey which was well made by the daughter; and the ring of gold was on the salmon from above.
[FN#34] "dian dumroib for sar-ol mogreis." Meyer gives "if there is any one to protect me." The above is Crowe's rendering.
Ailill and Medb view it. After that Fraech looks at it, and looks at his purse. "It seems to me it was for proof that I left my girdle,"
says Fraech. "On the truth of the sovereignty," says Fraech, "say what thou did'st about the ring." "This shall not be concealed from thee,"
says Ailill; "mine is the ring which was in thy purse, and I knew it is Find-abair gave it to thee. It is therefore I flung it into the Dark Pool. On the truth of thine honour and of thy soul, O Fraech, declare thou what way the bringing of it out happened."
"It shall not be concealed on thee," says Fraech. "The first day I found the ring in front of the outer court, and I knew it was a lovely gem. It is for that reason I put it up industriously in my purse. I heard, the day I went to the water, the maiden who had lost it a-looking for it. I said to her: 'What reward shall I have at thy hands for the finding of it?' She said to me that she would give a year's love to me.
"It happened I did not leave it about me; I had left it in the house behind me. We met not until we met at the giving of the sword into my hand in the river. After that I saw the time thou open'st the purse and flungest the ring into the water: I saw the salmon which leaped for it, so that it took it into its mouth. I then caught the salmon, took it up in the cloak, put it into the hand of the daughter. It is that salmon accordingly which is on the dish."
The criticising and the wondering at these stories begin in the house hold. "I shall not throw my mind on another youth in Erin after thee,"
says Find-abair. "Bind thyself for that," say Ailill and Medb, "and come thou to us with thy cows to the Spoil of the Cows from Cualnge;
and when thou shalt come with thy cows from the East back, ye shall wed here that night at once and Find-abair." "I shall do that thing," says Fraech. They are in it then until the morning. Fraech sets about him self with his suite. He then bids farewell to Ailill and Medb. They depart to their own territories then.
TAIN BO FRAICH PART II Unto Fraech it hath chanced, as he roved from his lands That his cattle were stolen by wandering bands:
And there met him his mother, and cried, "On thy way Thou hast tarried, and hard for thy slackness shalt pay!
In the Alps of the south, the wild mountains amid, Have thy children, thy wife, and thy cattle been hid:
And a three of thy kine have the Picts carried forth, And in Alba they pasture, but far to the north!"
"Now, alack!" answered Fraech, "what is best to be done?"
"Rest at home," said his mother, "nor seek them my son;
For to thee neither cattle, nor children, nor wife Can avail, if in seeking thou losest thy life;
And though cattle be lacking, the task shall be mine To replace what is lost, and to grant thee the kine."
"Nay, not so," answered Fraech, "by my soul I am sworn, That when cattle from Cualgne by force shall be torn To King Ailill and Maev on my faith as their guest I must ride with those cattle for war to the west!"
"Now but vainly," she said, "is this toil on thee cast;
Thou shalt lose what thou seekest", and from him she passed.
Three times nine of his men for that foray were chosen, and marched by his side, And a hawk flew before, and for hunting, was a hound with a hunting-leash tied;
To Ben Barchi they went, for the border of Ulster their faces were set:
And there, of its marches the warder, the conquering Conall they met.
Fraech hailed him, the conquering Conall, and told him the tale of his spoil;
"'Tis ill luck that awaits thee," said Conall, "thy quest shall be followed with toil!
"'Twill be long ere the goal thou art reaching, though thy heart in the seeking may be."
"Conall Cernach,[FN#35] hear thou my beseeching said Fraech, "let thine aid be to me;
I had hoped for this meeting with Conall, that his aid in the quest might be lent."
"I will go with thee truly," said Conall: with Fraech and his comrades he went.
[FN#35] Pronounced Cayr-nach.
Three times nine, Fraech and Conall before them, Over ocean from Ireland have passed;
Through the Land of North Saxony bore them, And the South Sea they sighted at last.
And again on the sea billows speeding, They went south, over Ichtian foam;
And marched on: southward still was their leading:
To the land where the Long-Beards have home:
But when Lombardy's bounds they were nearing They made stand; for above and around Were the high peaks of Alpa appearing, And the goal that they sought had been found.
On the Alps was a woman seen straying, and herding the flocks of the sheep, "Let our warriors behind be delaying," said Conall, "and south let us keep:
'Twere well we should speak with yon woman, perchance she hath wisdom to teach!"
And with Conall went Fraech at that counsel; they neared her, and held with her speech.
"Whence have come you?" she said: "Out of Ireland are we,"
Answered Conall: "Ill luck shall for Irishmen be In this country," she cried, "yet thy help I would win;
From thy land was my mother; thou art to me kin!"
"Of this land we know naught, nor where next we should turn,"
Answered Conall.; "its nature from thee we would learn."
"'Tis a grim land and hateful," the woman replied, "And the warriors are restless who forth from it ride;
For full often of captives, of women and herd Of fair kine by them taken is brought to me word."
"Canst thou say what latest spoil," said Fraech, "they won?"
"Ay," she said, "they harried Fraech, of Idath[FN#36] son He in Erin dwelleth, near the western sea;
Kine from him they carried, wife, and children three Here his wife abideth, there where dwells the king, Turn, and see his cattle, yonder pasturing."
[FN#36] Pronounced Eeda.
Out spoke Conall Cernach;[FN#37] "Aid us thou" he cried:
"Strength I lack," she answered, "I can only guide."
"Here is Fraech," said Conall, "yon his stolen cows":
"Fraech!" she asked him, "tell me, canst thou trust thy spouse?"
"Why," said Fraech, "though trusty, doubtless, when she went;
Now, since here she bideth, truth may well be spent."
"See ye now yon woman?" said she, "with your herd, Tell to her your errand, let her hear your word;
Trust in her, as Irish-sprung ye well may place;
More if ye would ask me, Ulster reared her race."
[FN#37] Pronounced Cayr-nach.
To that woman they went, nor their names from her hid;
And they greeted her; welcome in kindness she bid:
"What hath moved you," she said, "from your country to go?"
"On this journey," said Conall, "our guide hath been woe:
All the cattle that feed in these pastures are ours, And from us went the lady that's kept in yon towers."
"'Tis ill-luck," said the woman, "that waits on your way, All the men of this hold doth that lady obey;
Ye shall find, amid dangers, your danger most great In the serpent who guardeth the Liss at the gate."
"For that lady," said Fraech, "she is none of my She is fickle, no trust from me yet did she win:
But on thee we rely, thou art trusty, we know;
Never yet to an Ulsterman Ulster was foe."
"Is it men out of Ulster," she said, "I have met?"
"And is Conall," said Fraech, "thus unknown to you yet?
Of all heroes from Ulster the battle who faced Conall Cernach is foremost." His neck she embraced, And she cried, with her arms around Conall: "Of old Of the conquering Conall our prophets have told;
And 'tis ruin and doom to this hold that you bring;
For that Conall shall sack it, all prophecies sing."
"Hear my rede," she told him: "When at fall of day Come the kine for milking, I abroad will stay;
I the castle portal every eve should close:
Ye shall find it opened, free for tread of foes:
I will say the weakling calves awhile I keep;
'Tis for milk, I'll tell them: come then while they sleep;
Come, their castle enter, all its wealth to spoil;
Only rests that serpent, he our plans may foil:
Him it rests to vanquish, he will try you most;
Surely from that serpent swarms a serpent host!"
"Trust us well," answered Conall, "that raid will we do!
And the castle they sought, and the snake at them flew:
For it darted on Conall, and twined round his waist;
Yet the whole of that castle they plundered in haste, And the woman was freed, and her sons with her three And away from her prison she went with them free:
And of all of the jewels amassed in that dun The most costly and beauteous the conquerors won.
Then the serpent from Conall was loosed, from his belt It crept safely, no harm from that serpent he felt:
And they travelled back north to the Pictish domains, And a three of their cattle they found on the plains;
And, where Olla Mae Briuin[FN#38] his hold had of yore, By Dunolly their cattle they drove to the shore.
[FN#38] Pronounced "Brewin."
It chanced at Ard Uan Echach,[FN#39] where foam is hurled on high, That doom on Bicne falling, his death he came to die:
'Twas while the cows were driven that Bicne's life was lost:
By trampling hooves of cattle crushed down to death, or tossed;
To him was Loegaire[FN#40] father, and Conall Cernach chief And Inver-Bicne's title still marks his comrades' grief.
[FN#39] Pronounced "Ard Oon Ay-ha,"
[FN#40] Pronounced "Leary."
Across the Stream of Bicne the cows of Fraech have passed, And near they came to Benchor, and there their horns they cast:
'Tis thence the strand of Bangor for aye is named, 'tis said:
The Strand of Horns men call it; those horns his cattle shed.
To his home travelled Fraech, with his children, and And his cattle, and there with them lived out his life, Till the summons of Ailill and Maev he obeyed;
And when Cualgne was harried, he rode on the Raid.
TAIN BO FRAICH PART II LITERAL TRANSLATION It happened that his cows had been in the meanwhile stolen. His mother came to him. "Not active (or "lucky") of journey hast thou gone; it shall cause much of trouble to thee," she says. "Thy cows have been stolen, and thy three sons, and thy wife, so that they are in the mountain of Elpa. Three cows of them are in Alba of the North with the Cruthnechi (the Picts)." "Query, what shall I do?" he says to his mother. "Thou shalt do a non-going for seeking them; thou wouldest not give thy life for them," she says. "Thou shalt have cows at my hands besides them." "Not so this," he says: "I have pledged my hospitality and my soul to go to Ailill and to Medb with my cows to the Spoil of the Cows from Cualnge." "What thou seekest shall not be obtained,"
says his mother. At this she goes off from him then.
He then sets out with three nines, and a wood-cuckoo (hawk), and a hound of tie with them, until he goes to the territory of the Ulstermen, so that he meets with Conall Cernach (Conall the Victorious) at Benna Bairchi (a mountain on the Ulster border).
He tells his quest to him. "What awaits thee," says the latter, "shall not be lucky for thee. Much of trouble awaits thee," he says, "though in it the mind should be." "It will come to me," says Fraech to Connall, "that thou wouldest help me any time we should meet." (?) "I shall go truly," says Conall Cernach. They set of the three (i.e. the three nines) over sea, over Saxony of the North, over the Sea of Icht (the sea between England and France), to the north of the Long-bards (the dwellers of Lombardy), until they reached the mountains of Elpa.
They saw a herd-girl at tending of the sheep before them. "Let us go south," says Conall, "O Fraech, that we may address the woman yonder, and let our youths stay here."
They went then to a conversation. She said, "Whence are ye?" "Of the men of Erin," says Conall. "It shall not be lucky for the men of Erin truly, the coming to this country. From the men of Erin too is my mother. Aid thou me on account of relationship."
"Tell us something about our movements. What is the quality of the land we have to come to?" "A grim hateful land with troublesome warriors, who go on every side for carrying off cows and women as captives," she says. "What is the latest thing they have carried off?"
says Fraech. "The cows of Fraech, son of Idath, from the west of Erin, and his wife, and his three sons. Here is his wife here in the house of the king, here are his cows in the country in front of you." "Let thy aid come to us," says Conall. Little is my power, save guidance only." "This is Fraech," says Conall, and they are his cows that have been carried off." "Is the woman constant in your estimation?" she says. "Though constant in our estimation when she went, perchance she is not constant after coming." "The woman who frequents the cows, go ye to her; tell ye of your errand; of the men of Ireland her race; of the men of Ulster exactly."
They come to her; they receive her, and they name themselves to her, and she bids welcome to them. "What hath led you forth?" she says.
"Trouble hath led us forth," says Conall; "ours are the cows and the woman that is in the Liss."
"It shall not be lucky for you truly," she says, "the going up to the multitude of the woman; more troublesome to you than everything," she says, "is the serpent which is at guarding of the Liss." "She is not my country-name(?)," says Fraech, "she is not constant in my estimation; thou art constant in my estimation; we know thou wilt not lead us astray, since it is from the men of Ulster thou art." "Whence are ye from the men of Ulster?" she says. "This is Conall Cernach here, the bravest hero with the men of Ulster," says Fraech. She flings two hands around the throat of Conall Cernach. "The destruction has come in this expedition," she says, "since he has come to us; for it is to him the destruction of this dun has been prophesied. I shall go out to my house,"[FN#41] she says, "I shall not be at the milking of the cows. I shall leave the Liss opened; it is I who close it every night.[FN#42] I shall say it is for drink the calves were sucking.
Come thou into the dun, when they are sleeping; only trouble. some to you is the serpent which is at the dun; several tribes are let loose from it."
[FN#41] "To my house" is in the Egerton MS. only.
[FN#42] "Every night" is in the Egerton MS. only.
"We will go truly," says Conall. They attack the Liss; the serpent darts leap into the girdle of Conall Cernach, and they plunder the dun at once. They save off then the woman and the three sons, and they carry away whatever was the best of the gems of the dun, and Conall lets the serpent out of his girdle, and neither of them did harm to the other. And they came to the territory of the people of the Picts, until they saw three cows of their cows in it. They drove off to the Fort of Ollach mac Briuin (now Dunolly near Oban) with them, until they were at Ard Uan Echach (high-foaming Echach). It is there the gillie of Conall met his death at the driving of the cows, that is Bicne son of Loegaire; it is from this is (the name of) Inver Bicne (the Bicne estuary) at Benchor. They brought their cows over it thither. It is there they flung their horns from them, so that it is thence is (the name of) Tracht Benchoir (the Strand of Horn casting, perhaps the modern Bangor?).
Fraech goes away then to his territory after, and his wife, and his sons, and his cows with him, until he goes with Ailill and Medb for the Spoil of the Cows from Cualnge.
THE RAID FOR DARTAID'S CATTLE INTRODUCTION This tale is given by Windisch (Irische Texte, II. pp. 185-205), from two versions; one, whose translation he gives in full, except for one doubtful passage, is from the manuscript in the British Museum, known as Egerton, 1782 (dated 1414); the other is from the Yellow Book of Lecan (fourteenth century), in the library of Trinity College, Dublin.
The version in the Yellow Book is sometimes hard to read, which seems to be the reason why Windisch prefers to translate the younger authority, but though in some places the Egerton version is the fuller, the Yellow Book version (Y.B.L.) often adds passages, some of which Windisch has given in notes; some he has left untranslated. In the following prose version as much of Y.B.L. as adds anything to the Egerton text has been translated, with marks of interrogation where the attempted rendering is not certain: variants from the text adopted are placed below the prose version as footnotes. The insertions from Y.B.L. are indicated by brackets; but no note is taken of cases where the Egerton version is fuller than Y.B.L.
The opening of the story (the first five lines in the verse rendering) is in the eleventh century Book of the Dun Cow: the fragment agrees closely with the two later texts, differing in fact from Y.B.L. in one word only. All three texts are given in the original by Windisch.
The story is simple and straightforward, but is a good example of fairy vengeance, the description of the appearance of the troop recalls similar descriptions in the Tain bo Fraich, and in the Courtship of Ferb. The tale is further noticeable from its connection with the province of Munster: most of the heroic tales are connected with the other three provinces only. Orlam, the hero of the end of the tale, was one of Cuchulain's earliest victims in the Tain bo Cualgne.
THE RAID FOR DARTAID'S CATTLE FROM THE EGERTON MS. 1782 (EARLY FIFTEENTH-CENTURY), AND THE YELLOW BOOK OF LECAN (FOURTEENTH-CENTURY) EOCHO BEC,[FN#43] the son of Corpre, reigning in the land of Clew,[FN#44] Dwelt in Coolny's[FN#45] fort; and fostered sons of princes not a few:
Forty kine who grazed his pastures gave him milk to rear his wards;
Royal blood his charges boasted, sprung from Munster's noblest lords.
Maev and Ailill sought to meet him: heralds calling him they sent:
"Seven days hence I come" said Eocho; and the heralds from him went.
Now, as Eocho lay in slumber, in the night a vision came;
By a youthful squire attended, rose to view a fairy dame:
"Welcome be my greeting to you!" said the king: "Canst thou discern Who we are?" the fairy answered, "how didst thou our fashion learn?"
"Surely," said the king, "aforetime near to me hath been thy place!"
"Very near thee have we hovered, yet thou hast not seen my face."
"Where do ye abide?" said Eocho. "Yonder dwell we, with the Shee:[FN#46] "In the Fairy Mound of Coolny!" "Wherefore come ye hereto me?"
"We have come," she said, "a counsel as a gift to thee to bring!"
"Speak! and tell me of the counsel ye have brought me," said the king.
"Noble gifts," she said, "we offer that renown for thee shall gain When in foreign lands thou ridest; worship in thine own domain;
For a troop shall circle round thee, riding close beside thy hand:
Stately it shall be, with goodly horses from a foreign land!"
"Tell me of that troop," said Eocho, "in what numbers should we ride? "
Fifty horsemen is the number that befits thee," she replied:
[FN#43] Pronounced Yeo-ho Bayc.
[FN#44] Cliu, a district in Munster.
[FN#45] Spelt Cuillne, in Y.B.L. it is Cuille.
[FN#46] The Fairies, spelt Sidh.
"Fifty horses, black in colour; gold and silver reins and bits;
Fifty sets of gay equipment, such as fairies well befits;
These at early dawn to-morrow shall my care for thee provide:
Let thy foster-children with thee on the road thou makest ride!
Rightly do we come to help thee, who so valiantly in fray Guardest for us soil and country!" And the fairy passed away.
Eocho's folk at dawn have risen; fifty steeds they all behold:
Black the horses seemed; the bridles, stiff with silver and with gold, Firmly to the gate were fastened; fifty silver breeches there Heaped together shone, encrusted all with gold the brooches were:
There were fifty knightly vestments, bordered fair with golden thread:
Fifty horses, white, and glowing on their ears with deepest red, Nigh them stood; of reddish purple were the sweeping tails and manes;
Silver were the bits; their pasterns chained in front with brazen chains:
And, of fair findruine[FN#47] fashioned, was for every horse a whip, Furnished with a golden handle, wherewithal the goad to grip.
[FN#47] Pronounced "findroony."
Then King Eocho rose, and ready made him; in that fair array Forth they rode, nor did they tarry till they came to Croghan[FN#48] Ay.
Scarcely could the men of Connaught bear to see that sight, amazed At the dignity and splendour of the host on which they gazed;
For that troop was great; in serried ranks the fifty riders rode, Splendid with the state recounted; pride on all their faces glowed.
"Name the man who comes!" said Ailill; "Easy answer!" all replied, Eocho Bee, in Clew who ruleth, hither to thy court would ride":
Court and royal house were opened; in with welcome came they all;
Three long days and nights they lingered, feasting in King Ailill's hall.
Then to Ailill, king of Connaught, Eocho spake: "From out my land {50} Wherefore hast thou called me hither?" "Gifts are needed from thy hand,"
Ailill said; "a heavy burden is that task upon me laid, To maintain the men of Ireland when for Cualgne's kine we raid."
[FN#48] Pronounced Crow-han.
Eocho spoke: "What gift requirest thou from me?" "For milking-kine,"
Ailill said, "I ask"; and Eocho, "Few of these indeed are mine!
Forty sons of Munster's princes have I in my halls to rear;
These, my foster-sons, beside me m my troop have journeyed here;
Fifty herdsmen guard the cattle, forty cows my wards to feed, Seven times twenty graze beside them, to supply my people's need."
"If, for every man who follows thee as liege, and owns a farm, Thou a cow wilt yield," said Ailill, "then from foes with power to harm I will guard thee in the battle!" "Keep then faithfully thy vows,"
Eocho said, "this day as tribute shall to Croghan come the cows."
Thrice the sun hath set and risen while they feasting there abide, Maev and Ailill's bounty tasting, homeward then they quickly ride:
But the sons of Glaschu met them, who from western Donnan came;
Donnan, from the seas that bound it, Irross Donnan hath for name;
Seven times twenty men attacked them, and to battle they were brought, At the isle of O'Canàda, fiercely either party fought;
With his foster children round him, Eocho Bec in fight was killed, All the forty princes perished, with that news the land was filled;
All through Ireland lamentation rose for every youthful chief;
Four times twenty Munster princes, weeping for them, died of grief.
Now a vision came to Ailill, as in sleep he lay awhile, or a youth and dame approached him, fairer none in Erin's Isle:
"Who are ye?" said Ailill; "Conquest," said the fairy, "and Defeat "Though Defeat I shun," said Ailill, "Conquest joyfully I meet."
"Conquest thou shalt have!" she answered: "Of the future I would ask, Canst thou read my fate?" said Ailill: "Light indeed for me the task,"
Said the dame: "the kine of Dartaid, Eocho's daughter, may be won:
Forty cows she owns; to gain them send to her thy princely son, Orlam, whom that maiden loveth: let thy son to start prepare, Forty youths from Connaught with him, each of them a prince's heir:
Choose thou warriors stout and stately; I will give them garments bright, Even those that decked the princes who so lately fell in fight:
Bridles, brooches, all I give thee; ere the morning sun be high Thou shalt count that fairy treasure: to our country now we fly."
Swiftly to the son of Tassa sped they thence, to Corp the Gray:
On the northern bank of Naymon was his hold, and there he lay;
And before the men of Munster, as their champion did he stand:
He hath wrought-so runs the proverb-evil, longer than his hand.
As to Corp appeared the vision: "Say," he cried, "what names ye boast!"
"Ruin, one is called," they answered; "one, The Gathering of the Host!"
An assembled host I welcome," answered them the gray Corp Lee;
"Ruin I abhor": "And ruin," they replied, "is far from thee;
Thou shalt bring on sons of nobles, and of kings a ruin great":
"Fairy," said Corp Lee, the Gray one, "tell me of that future fate."
"Easy is the task," she answered, "youths of every royal race That in Connaught's land hath dwelling, come to-morrow to this place;
Munster's kine they hope to harry, for the Munster princes fell Yesterday with Connaught fighting; and the hour I plainly ten:
At the ninth hour of the morning shall they come: the band is small:
Have thou valiant men to meet them, and upon the raiders fall!
Munster's honour hath been tarnished! clear it by a glorious deed!
Thou shalt purge the shame if only in the foray thou succeed."
"What should be my force?" he asked her: "Take of heroes seven score For that fight," she said, "and with them seven times twenty warriors more:
Far from thee we now are flying; but shall meet thee with thy power When to-morrow's sun is shining; at the ninth, the fated hour."
At the dawn, the time appointed, all those steeds and garments gay Were in Connaught, and they found them at the gate of Croghan Ay;
All was there the fay had promised, all the gifts of which we told:
All the splendour that had lately decked the princes they behold.
Doubtful were the men of Connaught; some desired the risk to face;
Some to go refused: said Ailill, "It should bring us to disgrace If we spurned such offered bounty": Orlam his reproaches felt;
Sprang to horse; and towards the country rode, where Eocho's daughter dwelt:
And where flows the Shannon river, near that water's southern shore, Found her home; for as they halted, moated Clew[FN#49] rose high before.
[FN#49] Spelt Cliu.
Dartaid met them ere they halted, joyful there the prince to see:
All the kine are not assembled, of their count is lacking three!"
"Tarry not for search," said Orlam, "yet provision must we take On our steeds, for hostile Munster rings us round. Wilt home forsake, Maiden? wilt thou ride beside us?" "I will go indeed," she said.
Then, with all thy gathered cattle, come with us; with me to wed!
So they marched, and in the centre of their troop the kine were set, And the maiden rode beside them: but Corp Lee, the Gray, they met;
Seven times twenty heroes with him; and to battle they must go, And the Connaught nobles perished, fighting bravely with the foe:
All the sons of Connaught's princes, all the warriors with them died:
Orlam's self escaped the slaughter, he and eight who rode beside:
Yet he drave the cows to Croghan; ay, and fifty heifers too!
But, when first the foe made onset, they the maid in battle slew.
Near a lake, did Eocho's[FN#50] daughter, Dartaid, in the battle fall, From that lake, and her who perished, hath been named that region all:
Emly Darta is that country; Tain bo Dartae is the tale:
And, as prelude, 'tis recited, till the Cualgne[FN#51] Raid they hail.
[FN#50] Pronounced Yeo-ho.
[FN#51] Pronounced Kell-ny.
THE RAID FOR DARTAID'S CATTLE LITERAL TRANSLATION The Passages that occur only in the Yellow Book (Y.B.L.) are indicated by being placed in square brackets.
EOCHO BEC, the son of Corpre, king of Cliu, dwelt in the Dun of Cuillne,[FN#52] and with him were forty fosterlings, all sons of the kings of Munster; he had also forty milch-cows for their sustenance. By Ailill and Medb messengers were sent, asking him to come to a conference. "[In a week,"][FN#53] said Eocho, "I will go to that conference;" and the messengers departed from him.
[FN#52] The eleventh century MS., the Leabhar na h-Uidhri, which gives the first four lines of this tale as a fragment, adds here as a note:
"this is in the land of the O'Cuanach": apparently the O'Briens of Cuanach.
[FN#53] At Samhuin day (Egerton).
One night Eocho lay there in his sleep, when he saw something approach him; a woman, and a young man in her attendance. "Ye are welcome!"
said Eocho. ["Knowest thou us?"] said she, "Where hast thou learned to know us?" "It seems to me as if I had been near to you." "I think that we have been very near to one another, though we have not seen each other face to face!" "In what place do ye dwell?" said Eocho.
"Yonder in Sid Cuillne (the fairy mound of Cuillne)," said she. "And, wherefore have ye come?" "In order to give thee counsel," said she.
For what purpose is the counsel," said he, "that thou givest me?"
"Something," she said, "that will bring thee honour and renown on thy journey at home and abroad. A stately troop shall be round thee, and goodly foreign horses shall be under thee."[FN#54] "With how many shall I go?" said Eocho. "Fifty horsemen is the number that is suitable for thee," she answered.
[FN#54] Y.B.L. adds a passage that Windisch does not translate: it seems to run thus: "Unknown to thee is the half of what thou hast met:
it seems to us that foreign may be thy splendour"(?) "To-morrow in the morning fifty black horses, furnished with bridles of gold and silver, shall come to thee from me; and with them fifty sets of equipment of the equipment of the Side; and all of thy foster-children shall go with thee; well it becomes us to help thee, because thou art valiant in the defence of our country and our soil."
Then the woman left him.
Early in the morning they arise, there they see something: the fifty black horses, furnished with bridles of gold and silver tied fast to the gate of the castle, also fifty breeches of silver with embellishment of gold; and fifty youths' garments with their edges of spun gold, and fifty white horses with red ears and long tails, purple-red were all their tails and their manes, with silver bits (?)[FN#55] and foot-chains of brass upon each horse; there were also fifty whips of white bronze (findruine), with end pieces of gold that thereby they might be taken into hands.[FN#56] [FN#55] co m-belgib (?) Windisch translates "bridles," the same as cona srianaib above.
[FN#56] Y.B.L. adds, "Through wizardry was all that thing: it was recited (?) how great a thing had appeared, and he told his dream to his people."
Then King Eocho arises, and prepares himself (for the journey): they depart with this equipment to Cruachan Ai:[FN#57] and the people were well-nigh overcome with their consequence and appearance: their troop was great, goodly, splendid, compact: [fifty heroes, all with that appearance that has just been related.
"How is that man named?" said Ailill. "Not hard, Eocho Bec, the king of Cliu." They entered the Liss (outer court), and the royal house;
welcome was given to them, he remained there three days and three nights at the feasting.] [FN#57] Egerton here gives "Ailill and Medb made them welcome;" it omits the long passage in square brackets.
"Wherefore have I have been invited to come?" said Eocho to Ailill: "To learn if I can obtain a gift from thee," said Ailill; "for a heavy need weighs upon me, even the sustenance of the men of Ireland for the bringing of the cattle from Cualgne."
"What manner of gift is it that thou desirest?" said Eocho. "Nothing less than a gift of milking-kine," said Ailill. "There is no superfluity of these in my land," said Eocho; "I have forty fosterlings, sons of the kings of Munster, to bring them up (to manhood); they are here in my company, there are forty cows to supply the needs of these, to supply my own needs are seven times twenty milch-cows [there are fifty men for this cause watching over them].
"Let me have from thee," said Ailill, "one cow from each farmer who is under thy lordship as my share; moreover I will yield thee assistance if at any time thou art oppressed by superior might." "Thus let it be as thou sayest," said Eocho; "moreover, they shall come to thee this very day."
For three days and three nights they were hospitably entertained by Ailill and Medb, and then they departed homewards, till they met the sons of Glaschu, who came from Irross Donnan (the peninsula of Donnan, now Mayo); the number of those who met them was seven times twenty men, and they set themselves to attack each other, and to strive with each other in combat, and [at the island of O'Conchada (Inse Ua Conchada)] they fought together. In that place fell the forty sons of kings round Eocho Bec, and that news was spread abroad over all the land of Ireland, so that four times twenty kings' sons, of the youths of Munster, died, sorrowing for the deaths of these princes.
On another night, as Ailill lay in his sleep, upon his bed, he saw some thing, a young man and a woman, the fairest that could be found in Ireland. "Who are ye?" said Ailill. "Victory and Defeat are our names," she said. "Victory indeed is welcome to me, but not so Defeat," said Ailill. "Victory shall be thine in each form!" said she.
["What is the next thing after this that awaits us?" said Ailill.
"Not hard to tell thee," said she] "let men march out from thy palace in the morning, that thou mayest win for thyself the cattle of Dartaid, the daughter of Eocho. Forty is the number of her milch-cows, it is thine own son, Orlam mac Ailill, whom she loves. Let Orlam prepare for his journey with a stately troop of valiant men, also forty sons of those kings who dwell in the land of Connaught; and by me shall be given to them the same equipment that the other youths had who fell in yon fight, bridles and garments and brooches; [early in the morning shall count of the treasure be made, and now we go to our own land,"
said she].
Then they depart from him, and forthwith they go to [Corp[FN#58] Liath (the Gray),] who was the son of Tassach. His castle was on the bank of the river Nemain, upon the northern side, he was a champion of renown for the guarding of the men of Munster; longer than his hand is the evil he hath wrought. To this man also they appeared, and "What are your names?" said he: "Tecmall and Coscrad (Gathering of Hosts, and Destruction)," said they. "Gathering of Hosts is indeed good," said Corp Liath, "an evil thing is destruction": "There will be no destruction for thee, and thou shalt destroy the sons of kings and nobles": "And what," said Corp Liath, "is the next thing to be done?"
[FN#58] The Egerton MS. gives the name, Corb Cliach.
"That is easy to say," they said;[FN#59] "each son of a king and a queen, and each heir of a king that is in Connaught, is now coming upon you to bear off cows from your country, for that the sons of your kings and queens have fallen by the hand of the men of Connaught. To-morrow morning, at the ninth hour they will come, and small is their troop; so if valiant warriors go thither to meet them, the honour of Munster shall be preserved; if indeed thine adventure shall meet with success."
[FN#59] Y.B.L. gives the passage thus: "Assemble with you the sons of kings, and heirs of kings, that you may destroy the sons of kings and heirs of kings." "Who are they?" said Corp Liath. "A noble youth it is from Connaught: he comes to yon to drive your cows before him, after that your young men were yesterday destroyed by him, at the ninth hour of the morning they will come to take away the cows of Darta, the daughter of Eocho."
"With what number should I go?" he said. "Seven times twenty heroes thou shouldest take with thee," she replied, ["and seven times twenty warriors besides"]: "And now" said the woman, "we depart to meet thee to-morrow at the ninth hour."
At the time (appointed), when morning had come, the men of Connaught saw the horses and the raiment of which we have spoken, at the gate of the fort of Croghan, [even as she (the fairy) had foretold, and as we have told, so that at that gate was all she had promised, and all that had been seen on the sons of kings aforetime], and there was a doubt among the people whether they should go on that quest or not. "It is shame," said Ailill, "to refuse a thing that is good"; and upon that Orlam departed [till[FN#60] he came to the house of Dartaid, the daughter of Eocho, in Cliu Classach (Cliu the Moated), on the Shannon upon the south (bank).
[FN#60] Egerton Version has only "towards Chu till he came to the home of Dartaid, the daughter of Eocho: the maiden rejoiced," &c. From this point to the end the version in the Yellow Book is much fuller.
[There they halted], and the maiden rejoiced at their coming: "Three of the kine are missing." "We cannot wait for these; let the men take provision on their horses, [for rightly should we be afraid in the midst of Munster. Wilt thou depart with me, O maiden?" said he. "I will indeed go with thee," said she]. "Come then thou," said he, "and with thee all of thy cows."