she dared not turn her face towards her companion. He looked at her once or twice, as if in doubt whether to speak or not.
"Are you not going beyond your strength?" he said at length, gently.
Fleda said, "No," although in a tone that half confessed his suspicion. He was silent again, however, and she cast about in vain for something to speak of; it seemed to her that all subjects of conversation in general had been packed up for exportation; neither eye nor memory could light upon a single one. Block after block was passed, the pace at which he walked, and the manner of his care for her, alone showing that he knew what a very light hand was resting upon his arm.
"How pretty the curl of blue smoke is from that chimney," he said.
It was said with a tone so carelessly easy, that Fleda's heart jumped for one instant in the persuasion that he had seen and noticed nothing peculiar about her.
"I know it," she said, eagerly — "I have often thought of it — especially here in the city —"
"Why is it? what is it?"
Fleda's eye gave one of its exploratory looks at his, such as he remembered from years ago, before she spoke.
"Isn't it contrast? — or at least I think that helps the effect here."
"What do you make the contrast?" he said, quietly.
"Isn't it," said Fleda, with another glance, "the contrast of something pure and free and upward-tending, with what is below it? I did not mean the mere painter's contrast. In the country, smoke is more picturesque, but in the city I think it has more character."
"To how many people do you suppose it ever occurred that smoke had a character?" said he, smiling.
"You are laughing at me, Mr. Carleton; perhaps I deserve it."
"You do not think that," said he, with a look that forbade her to think it. "But I see you are of Lavater's mind, that everything has a physiognomy?"
"I think he was perfectly right," said Fleda. "Don't you, Mr.
Carleton?"
"To some people, yes! — But the expression is so subtle, that only very nice sensibilities, with fine training, can hope to catch it; therefore, to the mass of the world Lavater would talk nonsense."
"That is a gentle hint to me. But if I talk nonsense, I wish you would set me right, Mr. Carleton; I am very apt to amuse myself with tracing out fancied analogies in almost everything, and I may carry it too far — too far to be spoken of wisely. I think it enlarges the field of pleasure very much. Where one eye is stopped, another is but invited on."
"So," said Mr. Carleton, "while that puff of smoke would lead one person's imagination only down the chimney to the kitchen fire, it would take another's — where did yours go?" said he, suddenly turning round upon her.
Fleda met his eye again, without speaking; but her look had, perhaps, more than half revealed her thought, for she was answered with a smile so intelligent and sympathetic, that she was abashed.
"How very much religion heightens the enjoyments of life!" Mr.
Carleton said, after a while.
Fleda's heart throbbed an answer — she did not speak.
"Both in its direct and indirect action. The mind is set free from influences that narrowed its range and dimmed its vision, and refined to a keener sensibility, a juster perception, a higher power of appreciation, by far, than it had before. And then, to say nothing of religion's own peculiar sphere of enjoyment, technically religious — what a field of pleasure it opens to its possessor in the world of moral beauty, most partially known to any other — and the fine but exquisite analogies of things material with things spiritual — those _harmonies of Nature_, to which, talk as they will, all other ears are deaf."
"You know," said Fleda, with full eyes that she dared not show, "how Henry Martyn said that he found he enjoyed painting and music so much more after he became a Christian."
"I remember. It is the substituting a just medium for a false one — it is putting nature within and nature without in tune with each other, so that the chords are perfect now which were jarring before."
"And yet how far people would be from believing you, Mr.
Carleton."
"Yes, they are possessed with the contrary notion. But in all the creation nothing has a one-sided usefulness. What a reflection it would be upon the wisdom of its Author, if godliness alone were the exception — if it were not 'profitable for the life that now is, as well as for that which is to come!' "
"They make that work the other way, don't they?" said Fleda;
"not being able to see how thorough religion should be for anybody's happiness, they make use of your argument to conclude that it is not what the Bible requires. How I have heard that urged — that God intended his creatures to be happy — as a reason why they should disobey him! They lay hold on the wrong end of the argument, and work backwards."
"Precisely.
" 'God intended his creatures to be happy.
" 'Strict obedience would make them unhappy.
" 'Therefore, he does not intend them to obey.' "
"They never put it before them quite so clearly," said Fleda.
"They would startle at it a little. But so they would at the right stating of the case."
"And how would that be, Mr. Carleton?"
"It might be somewhat after this fashion — " 'God requires nothing that is not for the happiness of his people.
" 'He requires perfect obedience.
" 'Therefore, perfect obedience is for their happiness.'
"But unbelief will not understand that. Did it ever strike you how much there is in those words, 'Come and see?' All that argument can do, after all, is but to persuade to that. Only faith will submit to terms, and enter the narrow gate; and only obedience knows what the prospect is on the other side."
"But isn't it true, Mr. Carleton, that the world have some cause for their opinion — judging as they do by the outside?
The peculiar pleasures of religion, as you say, are out of sight, and they do not always find in religious people that enlargement and refinement of which you were speaking."
"Because they make unequal comparisons. Recollect that, as God has declared, the ranks of religion are not for the most part filled from the wise and the great. In making your estimate, you must measure things equal in other respects. Compare the same man with himself before he was a Christian, or with his unchristianized fellows, and you will find invariably the refining, dignifying, ennobling, influence of true religion — the enlarged intelligence, and the greater power of enjoyment."
"And besides those causes of pleasure-giving that your mentioned," said Fleda, "there is a mind at ease; and how much that is, alone! If I may judge others by myself, the mere fact of being unpoised, unresting, disables the mind from a thousand things that are joyfully relished by one entirely at ease."
"Yes," said he; "do you remember that word, — 'The stones of the field shall be at peace with thee?' "
"I am afraid people would understand you as little as they would me, Mr. Carleton," said Fleda, laughing.
He smiled, rather a prolonged smile, the expression of which Fleda could not make out; she felt that _she_ did not quite understand him.
"I have thought," said he, after a pause, "that much of the beauty we find in many things is owing to a hidden analogy — the harmony they make with some unknown string of the mind's harp which they have set a-vibrating. But the music of that is so low and soft, that one must listen very closely to find out what it is."
"Why, that is the very theory of which I gave you a smoky illustration a little while ago," said Fleda. "I thought I was on safe ground, after what you said about the characters of flowers, for that was a little —"
"Fanciful?" said he, smiling.
"What you please,"' said Fleda, colouring a little — "I am sure it is true. The theory, I mean. I have many a time felt it, though I never put it in words. I shall think of that."
"Did you ever happen to see the very early dawn of a winter's morning?" said he.
But he laughed the next instant at the comical expression of Fleda's face as it was turned to him.
"Forgive me for supposing you as ignorant as myself. I have seen it —once."
"Appreciated it, I hope, that time?" said Fleda.
"I shall never forget it."
"And it never wrought in you a desire to see it again?"
"I might see many a dawn," said he, smiling, "without what I saw then. It was very early, and a cloudy morning, so that night had still almost undisturbed possession of earth and sky; but in the south-eastern quarter, between two clouds, there was a space of fair white promise, hardly making any impression upon the darkness, but only set off by it. And upon this one bright spot in earth or heaven, rode the planet of the morning — the sun's forerunner — bright upon the brightness. All else was dusky, except where overhead the clouds had parted again and showed a faint old moon, glimmering down upon the night it could no longer be said to 'rule.' "
"Beautiful!" said Fleda. "There is hardly any time I like so well as the dawn of a winter morning, with an old moon in the sky. Summer weather has no beauty like it — in some things."
"Once," continued Mr. Carleton, "I should have seen no more than I have told you — the beauty that every cultivated eye must take in. But now, methought I saw the dayspring that has come upon a longer night; and from out of the midst of it there was the fair face of the morning star looking at me with its sweet reminder and invitation; looking over the world with its aspect of triumphant expectancy: there was its calm assurance of the coming day — its promise that the star of hope, which now there were only a few watching eyes to see, should presently be followed by the full beams of the Sun of Righteousness making the kingdoms of the world His own. Your memory may bring to you the words that came to mine, the promise 'to him that overcometh,' and the beauty of the lips that made it: the encouragement to 'patient continuance in well doing,' 'till the day break, and the shadows flee away.'
And there, on the other hand, was the substituted light of earth's wisdom and inventions, dominant yet, but waning, and soon to be put out for ever."
Fleda was crying again, and perhaps that was the reason why Mr. Carleton was silent for some time. She was very sorry to show herself so weak, but she could not help it; part of his words had come too close. And when she had recovered again, she was absolutely silent too, for they were nearing Sloman- street, and she could not take him there with her. She did not know what to say, nor what he would think; and she said not another word till they came to the corner. There she must stop and speak.
"I am very much obliged to you, Mr. Carleton," she said, drawing her hand from his arm, "for taking care of me all this disagreeable way; I will not give you any more trouble."
"You are not going to dismiss me?" said he, looking at her with a countenance of serious anxiety.
"I must," said Fleda, ingenuously — "I have business to attend to here —"
"But you will let me have the pleasure of waiting for you?"
"O no," said Fleda, hesitating and flushing — "thank you, Mr.
Carleton; but pray do not — I don't know at all how long I may be detained."
He bowed, she thought gravely, and turned away; and she entered the little wretched street, with a strange feeling of pain that she could not analyze. She did not know where it came from, but she thought if there only had been a hiding- place for her, she could have sat down and wept a whole heartful. The feeling must be kept back now, and it was soon forgotten in the throbbing of her heart at another thought which took entire possession.
The sun was not down — there was time enough — but it was with a step and eye of hurried anxiety that Fleda passed along the little street, for fear of missing her quest, or lest Dinah should have changed her domicile. Yet would her uncle have named it for their meeting if he had not been sure of it? It was very odd he should have appointed that place at all, and Fleda was inclined to think he must have seen Dinah by some chance, or it never would have come into his head. Still her eye passed unheeding over all the varieties of dinginess and misery in her way, intent only upon finding that particular dingy cellar-way which used to admit her to Dinah's premises.
It was found at last, and she went in.
The old woman, herself most unchanged, did not know the young lady, but well remembered the little girl whom Fleda brought to her mind. And then she was overjoyed to see her, and asked a multitude of questions, and told a long story of her having met Mr. Rossitur in the street the other day, "in the last place where she'd have looked to see him;" and how old he had grown, and how surprised she had been to see the gray hairs in his head. Fleda at last gave her to understand that she expected him to meet her there, and would like to see him alone; and the good woman immediately took her work into another apartment, made up the fire, and set up the chairs, and leaving her, assured Fleda she would lock up the doors, "and not let no one come through."
It was sundown, and later, Fleda thought, and she felt as if every pulse was doing double duty. No matter, if she were shattered and the work done. But what work! Oh, the needlessness, the cruelty, the folly of it! And how much of the ill consequences she might be unable, after all, to ward off. She took off her hat, to relieve a nervous smothered feeling; and walked, and sat down; and then sat still, from trembling inability to do anything else. Dinah's poor little room, clean though it was, looked to her the most dismal place in the world, from its association with her errand; she hid her face on her knees, that she might have no disagreeableness to contend with, but that which could not be shut out.
It had lain there some time, till a sudden feeling of terror at the growing lateness made her raise it to look at the window. Mr. Rossitur was standings still before her — he must have come in very softly — and looking — oh, Fleda had not imagined him looking so changed. All was forgotten — the wrong, and the needlessness, and the indignation with which she had sometimes thought of it; Fleda remembered nothing but love and pity, and threw herself upon his neck with such tears of tenderness and sympathy, such kisses of forgiveness and comfort-speaking, as might have broken a stouter heart than Mr. Rossitur's. He held her in his arms for a few minutes, passively suffering her caresses, and then gently unloosing her hold, placed her on a seat, sat down a little way off, covered his face and groaned aloud.
Fleda could not recover herself at once. Then shaking off her agitation, she came and knelt down by his side, and putting one arm over his shoulders, laid her cheek against his forehead. Words were beyond reach, but his forehead was wet with her tears; and kisses, of soft entreaty, of winning assurance, said all she could say.
"What did you come here for, Fleda?" said Mr. Rossitur, at length, without changing his position.
"To bring you home, uncle Rolf."
"Home!" said he, with an accent between bitterness and despair.
"Yes, for it's all over, it's all forgotten — there is no more to be said about it at all," said Fleda, getting her words out she didn't know how.
What is forgotten?" said he, harshly.
"All that you would wish, Sir," replied Fleda, softly and gently; "there is no more to be done about it; and I came to tell you, if possible, before it was too late. Oh, I'm so glad!" and her arms and her cheek pressed closer, as fresh tears stopped her voice.
"How do you know, Fleda?" said Mr. Rossitur, raising his head, and bringing hers to his shoulder, while his arms in turn enclosed her.
Fleda whispered, "He told me so himself."
"Who?"
"Mr. Thorn."
The words were but just spoken above her breath. Mr. Rossitur was silent for some time.
"Are you sure you understood him?"
"Yes, Sir; it could not have been spoken plainer."
"Are you quite sure he meant what he said, Fleda?"
"Perfectly sure, uncle Rolf! I know he did."
"What stipulation did he make beforehand?"
"He did it without any stipulation, Sir."
"What was his inducement, then? If I know him, he is not a man to act without any."
Fleda's cheek was dyed, but except that, she gave no other answer.
"Why has it been left so long?" said her uncle, presently.
"I don't know, Sir — he said nothing about that. He promised that neither we nor the world should hear anything more of it."
"The world!" said Mr. Rossitur.
"No, Sir; he said that only one or two persons had any notion of it, and that their secrecy he had the means of securing."
"Did he tell you anything more?"
"Only that he had the matter entirely under his control, and that never a whisper of it should be heard again. No promise could be given more fully and absolutely."
Mr. Rossitur drew a long breath, speaking to Fleda's ear very great relief, and was silent.
"And what reward is he to have for this, Fleda?" he said, after some musing.
"All that my hearty thanks and gratitude can give, as far as I am concerned, Sir."
"Is that what he expects, Fleda?"
"I cannot help what he expects," said Fleda, in some distress.
"What have you engaged yourself to, my child?"
"Nothing in the world, uncle Rolf!" said Fleda, earnestly — "nothing in the world. I haven't engaged myself to anything.
The promise was made freely, without any sort of stipulation."
Mr. Rossitur looked thoughtful and disquieted. Fleda's tears were pouring again.
"I will not trust him," he said; "I will not stay in the country!"
"But you will come home, uncle?" said Fleda, terrified.
"Yes, my dear child — yes, my dear child!" he said, tenderly, putting his arms round Fleda again, and kissing, with an earnestness of acknowledgment that went to her heart, her lips and brow; "you shall do what you will with me; and when I go, we will all go together."
From Queechy? from America? But she had no time for that thought now.
"You said, 'for Hugh's sake,' " Mr. Rossitur observed, after a pause, and with some apparent difficulty; "what of him?"
"He is not well, uncle Rolf," said Fleda; "and I think the best medicine will be the sight of you again."
Mr. Rossitur looked pale, and was silent a moment.
"And my wife?" he said.
His face, and the thought of those faces at home, were too much for Fleda; she could not help it. "Oh, uncle Rolf," she said, hiding her face, "they only want to see you again now!"
Mr. Rossitur leaned his head in his hands and groaned; and Fleda could but cry; she felt there was nothing to say.
"It was for Marion," he said at length; "it was when I was hard pressed, and I was fearful if it were known that it might ruin her prospects. I wanted that miserable sum — only four thousand dollars — that fellow Schwiden asked to borrow it of me for a few days, and to refuse would have been to confess all. I dared not try my credit, and I just madly took that step that proved irretrievable. I counted at the moment upon funds that were coming to me only the next week — sure, I thought, as possible — but the man cheated me, and our embarrassments thickened from that time; that thing has been a weight — oh, a weight of deadening power! — round my neck ever since. I have died a living death these six years!"
"I know it, dear uncle — I know it all!" said Fleda, bringing the sympathizing touch of her cheek to his again. "The good that it did has been unspeakably overbalanced by the evil.
Even long ago I knew that."
"The good that it did!" It was no time then to moralize, but he must know that Marion was at home, or he might incautiously reveal to her what happily there was no necessity for her ever knowing. And the story must give him great and fresh pain.
"Dear uncle Rolf," said Fleda, pressing closer to him "we may be happier than we have been in a long time, if you will only take it so. The cloud upon you has been a cloud upon us."
"I know it!" he exclaimed — "a cloud that served to show me that my jewels were diamonds!"
"You have an accession to your jewels, uncle Rolf."
"What do you mean?"
"I mean," said Fleda, trembling, "that there are two more at home."
He held her back to look at her.
"Can't you guess who?"
"No!" said he. "What do you mean?"
"I must tell you, because they know nothing, and needn't know, of all this matter."
"What are you talking about?"
"Marion is there!"
"Marion!" exclaimed Mr. Rossitur, with quick changes of expression — "Marion! At Queechy! — and her husband?"
"No, Sir — a dear little child."
"Marion! — and her husband — where is he?"
Fleda hesitated.
"I don't know — I don't know whether she knows."
"Is he dead?"
"No, Sir."
Mr. Rossitur put her away, and got up and walked, or strode up and down the little apartment. Fleda dared not look at him, even by the faint glimmer that came from the chimney.
But abroad it was perfectly dark — the stars were shining, the only lamps that illumined the poor little street, and for a long time there had been no light in the room but that of the tiny wood fire. Dinah never could be persuaded of the superior cheapness of coal. Fleda came at last to her uncle's side, and putting her arm within his, said — "How soon will you set off for home, uncle Rolf?"
"To-morrow morning."
"You must take the boat to Bridgeport now — you know the river is fast."
"Yes, I know."
"Then I will meet you at the wharf, uncle Rolf — at what o'clock?"
"My dear child," said he, stopping and passing his hand tenderly over her cheek, "are you fit for it to-morrow? You had better stay where you are quietly for a few days — you want rest."
"No, I will go home with you," said Fleda, "and rest there.
But hadn't we better let Dinah in, and bid her good-bye? for I ought to be somewhere else to get ready."
Dinah was called, and a few kind words spoken, and with a more substantial remembrance, or reward, from Fleda's hand, they left her.
Fleda had the support of her uncle's arm till they came within sight of the house, and then he stood and watched her while she went the rest of the way alone.
Anything more white and spirit-looking, and more spirit-like, in its purity and peacefulness surely did not walk that night.
There was music in her ear, and abroad in the star-light, more ethereal than Ariel's; but she knew where it came from — it was the chimes of her heart that were ringing; and never a happier peal, nor ever had the mental atmosphere been more clear for their sounding. Thankfulness — that was the oftenest note — swelling thankfulness for her success — joy for herself and for the dear ones at home — generous delight at having been the instrument of their relief — the harmonies of pure affections, without any grating now — the hope, well grounded she thought, of improvement in her uncle, and better times for them all — a childlike peace that was at rest with itself and the world — these were mingling and interchanging their music, and again and again, in the midst of it all, faith rang the last chime in heaven.
CHAPTER XVI.
"As some lone bird at day's departing hour Sings in the sunbeam of the transient shower, Forgetful though its wings are wet the while."
BOWLES.
Happily possessed with the notion that there was some hidden mystery in Fleda's movements, Mrs. Pritchard said not a word about her having gone out, and only spoke in looks her pain at the imprudence of which she had been guilty. But when Fleda asked to have a carriage ordered to take her to the boat in the morning, the good housekeeper could not hold any longer.
"Miss Fleda," said she, with a look of very serious remonstrance — "I don't know what you're thinking of, but _I_ know you're fixing to kill yourself. You are no more fit to go to Queechy to-morrow than you were to be out till seven o'clock this evening; and if you saw yourself, you wouldn't want me to say any more. There is not the least morsel of colour in your face, and you look as if you had a mind to get rid of your body altogether as fast as you can! You want to be in bed for two days running, now this minute."
"Thank you, dear Mrs. Pritchard," said Fleda, smiling — "you are very careful of me, but I must go home to-morrow, and go to bed afterwards."
The housekeeper looked at her a minute in silence, and then said, "Don't, dear Miss Fleda!" with an energy of entreaty, which brought the tears into Fleda's eyes. But she persisted in desiring the carriage, and Mrs. Pritchard was silenced, observing, however, that she shouldn't wonder if she wasn't able to go, after all. Fleda herself was not without a doubt on the subject before the evening was over. The reaction, complete now, began to make itself felt, and morning settled the question. She was not able even to rise from her bed.
The housekeeper was, in a sort, delighted; and Fleda was in too passive a mood of body and mind to have any care on the subject. The agitation of the past days had given way to an absolute quiet, that seemed as if nothing could ever ruffle it again, and this feeling was seconded by the extreme prostration of body. She was a mere child in the hands of her nurse, and had, Mrs. Pritchard said, "if she wouldn't mind her telling — the sweetest baby-face that ever had so much sense belonging to it."
The morning was half spent in dozing slumbers, when Fleda heard a rush of footsteps, much lighter and sprightlier than good Mrs. Pritchard's, coming up the stairs, and pattering along the entry to her room, and, with little ceremony, in rushed Florence and Constance Evelyn. They almost smothered Fleda with their delighted caresses, and ran so hard their questions about her looks and her illness, that she was well nigh spared the trouble of answering.
"You horrid little creature!" said Constance, "why didn't you come straight to our house? Just think of the injurious suspicions you have exposed us to! — to say nothing of the extent of fiction we have found ourselves obliged to execute.
I didn't expect it of you, little Queechy."
Fleda kept her pale face quiet on the pillow, and only smiled her incredulous curiosity.
"But when did you come back, Fleda?" said Miss Evelyn.
"We should never have known a breath about your being here,"
Constance went on. "We were sitting last night, in peaceful unconsciousness of there being any neglected calls upon our friendship in the vicinity, when Mr. Carleton came in and asked for you. Imagine our horror! We said you had gone out early in the afternoon, and had not returned."
"You didn't say that!" said Fleda, colouring.
"And he remarked at some length," said Constance, "upon the importance of young ladies having some attendance when they are out late in the evening, and that you in particular were one of those persons — he didn't say, but he intimated, of a slightly volatile disposition — whom their friends ought not to lose sight of."
"But what brought you to town again, Fleda " said the elder sister.
"What makes you talk so, Constance?" said Fleda.
"I haven't told you the half!" said Constance, demurely. "And then mamma excused herself as well as she could, and Mr.
Carleton said, very seriously, that he knew there was a great element of headstrongness in your character; he had remarked it, he said, when you were arguing with Mr. Stackpole."
"Constance, be quiet!" said her sister. "_Will_ you tell me, Fleda, what you have come to town for? I am dying with curiosity."
"Then it's inordinate curiosity, and ought to be checked, my dear," said Fleda, smiling.
"Tell me."
"I came to take care of some business that could not very well be attended to at a distance."
"Who did you come with?"
"One of our Queechy neighbours that I heard was coming to New York."
"Wasn't your uncle at home?"
"Of course not. If he had been, there would have been no need of my stirring."
"But was there nobody else to do it but you?"
"Uncle Orrin away, you know; and Charlton down at his post — Fort Hamilton, is it? — I forget which fort — he is fast there."
"He is not so very fast," said Constance, "for I see him every now and then in Broadway, shouldering Mr. Thorn instead of a musket; and he has taken up the distressing idea that it is part of his duty to oversee the progress of Florence's worsted-work — (I've made over that horrid thing to her, Fleda) — or else his precision has been struck with the anomaly of blue stars on a white ground, and he is studying that — I don't know which; and so every few nights he rushes over from Governor's Island, or somewhere, to prosecute inquiries. Mamma is quite concerned about him; she says he is wearing himself out."
The mixture of amusement, admiration, and affection, with which the other sister looked at her, and laughed with her was a pretty thing to see.
"But where is your other cousin — Hugh?" said Florence.
"He was not well."
"Where is your uncle?"
"He will be at home to-day, I expect; and so should I have been — I meant to be there as soon as he was, but I found this morning that I was not well enough — to my sorrow."
"You were not going alone!"
"Oh, no! — a friend of ours was going to-day."
"I never saw anybody with so many friends, said Florence. "But you are coming to us now, Fleda. How soon are you going to get up?"
"Oh, by to-morrow," said Fleda, smiling; "but I had better stay where I am the little while I shall be here. I must go home the first minute I can find an opportunity."
"But you sha'n't find an opportunity till we've had you," said Constance. "I'm going to bring a carriage for you this afternoon. I could bear the loss of your friendship, my dear, but not the peril of my own reputation. Mr. Carleton is under the impression that you are suffering from a momentary succession of fainting fits; and if we were to leave you here in an empty house, to come out of them at your leisure, what would he think of us?"
What would he think? Oh, world! Is this it?
But Fleda was not able to be moved in the afternoon; and it soon appeared that nature would take more revenge than a day's sleep for the rough handling she had had the past week. Fleda could not rise from her bed the next morning; and instead of that, a kind of nondescript nervous fever set in, nowise dangerous, but very wearying. She was, nevertheless, extremely glad of it, for it would serve to explain to all her friends the change of look which had astonished them. They would make it now the token of coming, not of past, evil. The rest she took with her accustomed patience and quietness, thankful for everything, after the anxiety and the relief she had just before known.
Dr. Gregory came home from Philadelphia in the height of her attack, and aggravated it for a day or two with the fear of his questioning. But Fleda was surprised at his want of curiosity. He asked her, indeed, what she had come to town for, but her whispered answer of "business," seemed to satisfy him, for he did not inquire what the business was. He did ask her, furthermore, what had made her get sick; but this time he was satisfied more easily still, with a very curious, sweet smile, which was the utmost reply Fleda's wits, at the moment, could frame. "Well, get well," said he, kissing her heartily once or twice, "and I wont quarrel with you about it."
The getting well, however, promised to be a leisurely affair.
Dr. Gregory staid two or three days, and then went on to Boston, leaving Fleda in no want of him.
Mrs. Pritchard was the tenderest and carefullest of nurses.
The Evelyns did everything but nurse her. They sat by her, talked to her, made her laugh, and not seldom made her look sober too, with their wild tales of the world and the world's doings. But they were indeed very affectionate and kind, and Fleda loved them for it. If they wearied her sometimes with their talk, it was a change from the weariness of fever and silence that on the whole was useful.
She was quieting herself one morning, as well as she could, in the midst of both, lying with shut eyes against her pillow, and trying to fix her mind on pleasant things, when she heard Mrs. Pritchard open the door and come in. She knew it was Mrs.
Pritchard, so she didn't move nor look. But, in a moment, the knowledge that Mrs. Pritchard's feet had stopped just by the bed, and a strange sensation of something delicious saluting her, made her open her eyes; when they lighted upon a huge bunch of violets just before them, and in most friendly neighbourhood to her nose. Fleda started up, and her "Oh!"
fairly made the housekeeper laugh; it was the very quintessence of gratification.
"Where did you get them?"
"I didn't get them, indeed, Miss Fleda," said the housekeeper, gravely, with an immense amount of delighted satisfaction.
"Delicious! — Where did they come from?"
"Well, they must have come from a greenhouse, or hothouse, or something of that kind, Miss Fleda — these things don't grow nowhere out o' doors at this time."
Mrs. Pritchard guessed Fleda had got the clue, from her quick change of colour and falling eye. There was a quick little smile too; and "How kind!" was upon the end of Fleda's tongue, but it never got any further. Her energies, so far as expression was concerned, seemed to be concentrated in the act of smelling. Mrs. Pritchard stood by.
"They must be put in water," said Fleda — "I must have a dish for them — Dear Mrs. Pritchard, will you get me one?"
The housekeeper went, smiling to herself. The dish was brought, the violets placed in it, and a little table, at Fleda's request, was set by the side of the bed, close to her pillow, for them to stand upon; and Fleda lay on her pillow and looked at them.
There never were purer-breathed flowers than those. All the pleasant associations of Fleda's life seemed to hang about them, from the time when her childish eyes had first made acquaintance with violets, to the conversation in the library a few days ago; and painful things stood aloof — they had no part. The freshness of youth, and the sweetness of spring- time, and all the kindly influences which had ever joined with both to bless her, came back with their blessing in the violets' reminding breath. Fleda shut her eyes and she felt it; she opened her eyes, and the little, double blue things smiled at her good-humouredly, and said, "Here we are — you may shut them again." And it was curious how often Fleda gave them a smile back as she did so.
Mrs. Pritchard thought Fleda lived upon the violets that day rather than upon food and medicine; or, at least, she said, they agreed remarkably well together. And the next day it was much the same.
"What will you do when they are withered?" she said, that evening. "I shall have to see and get some more for you."
"Oh, they will last a great while," said Fleda, smiling.
But the next morning Mrs. Pritchard came into her room with a great bunch of roses, the very like of the one Fleda had had at the Evelyns'. She delivered them with a sort of silent triumph, and then, as before, stood by to enjoy Fleda and the flowers together. But the degree of Fleda's wonderment, pleasure, and gratitude, made her reception of them, outwardly at least, this time rather grave.
"You may throw the others away now, Miss Fleda," said the housekeeper, smiling.
"Indeed, I shall not!"
"The violets, I suppose, is all gone," Mrs. Pritchard went on;
"but I never did see such a bunch of roses as that since I lived anywhere. They have made a rose of you, Miss Fleda."
"How beautiful!" was Fleda's answer.
"Somebody — he didn't say who — desired to know particularly how Miss Ringgan was to-day."
"Somebody is _very_ kind!" said Fleda, from the bottom of her heart. "But, dear Mrs. Pritchard, I shall want another dish."
Somebody was kind, she thought more and more; for there came every day or two the most delicious bouquets, every day different. They were _at least_ equal in their soothing and refreshing influences, to all the efforts of all the Evelyns and Mrs. Pritchard put together. There never came any name with them, and there never was any need. Those bunches of flowers certainly had a physiognomy; and to Fleda were (not the flowers, but the choosing, cutting, and putting of them together) the embodiment of an amount of grace, refined feeling, generosity, and kindness, that her imagination never thought of in connection with but one person. And his kindness was answered, perhaps Mrs. Pritchard better than Fleda guessed how well, from the delighted colour and sparkle of the eye with which every fresh arrival was greeted as it walked into her room. By Fleda's order, the bouquets were invariably put out of sight before the Evelyns made their first visit in the morning, and not brought out again till all danger of seeing them any more for the day was past. The regular coming of these floral messengers confirmed Mrs. Pritchard in her mysterious surmises about Fleda, which were still further strengthened by this incomprehensible order; and at last she got so into the spirit of the thing, that if she heard an untimely ring at the door, she would catch up a glass of flowers and run as if they had been contraband, without a word from anybody.
The Evelyns wrote to Mrs. Rossitur, by Fleda's desire, so as not to alarm her; merely saying that Fleda was not quite well, and that they meant to keep her a little while to recruit herself; and that Mrs. Rossitur must send her some clothes.
This last clause was the particular addition of Constance.
The fever lasted a fortnight, and then went off by degrees, leaving her with a very small portion of her ordinary strength. Fleda was to go to the Evelyns' as soon as she could bear it; at present she was only able to come down to the little back parlour, and sit in the doctor's arm-chair, and eat jelly, and sleep, and look at Constance, and, when Constance was not there, look at her flowers. She could hardly bear a book as yet. She hadn't a bit of colour in her face, Mrs. Pritchard said, but she looked better than when she came to town; and to herself the good housekeeper added, that she looked happier too. No doubt that was true. Fleda's principal feeling, ever since she lay down in her bed, had been thankfulness; and now that the ease of returning health was joined to this feeling, her face, with all its subdued gravity, was as untroubled in its expression as the faces of her flowers.
She was disagreeably surprised one day, after she had been two or three days down stairs, by a visit from Mrs. Thorn. In her well-grounded dread of seeing one person, Fleda had given strict orders that no _gentleman_ should be admitted; she had not counted upon this invasion. Mrs. Thorn had always been extremely kind to her, but though Fleda gave her credit for thorough good-heartedness, and a true liking for herself, she could not disconnect her attentions from another thought, and therefore always wished them away; and never had her kind face been more thoroughly disagreeable to Fleda than when it made its appearance in the doctor's little back parlour on this occasion. With even more than her usual fondness, or Fleda's excited imagination fancied so, Mrs. Thorn lavished caresses upon her, and finally besought her to go out and take the air in her carriage. Fleda tried most earnestly to get rid of this invitation, and was gently unpersuadable, till the lady at last was brought to promise that she should see no creature during the drive but herself. An ominous promise! but Fleda did not know any longer how to refuse without hurting a person for whom she had really a grateful regard. So she went, and doubted afterwards exceedingly whether she had done well.
She took special good care to see nobody again till she went to the Evelyns'. But then precautions were at an end. It was no longer possible to keep herself shut up. She had cause, poor child, the very first night of her coming, to wish herself back again.
This first evening she would fain have pleaded weakness as her excuse, and gone to her room, but Constance laid violent hands on her, and insisted that she should stay at least a little while with them. And she seemed fated to see all her friends in a bevy. First came Charlton; then followed the Decaturs, whom she knew and liked very well, and engrossed her, happily before her cousin had time to make any inquiries; then came Mr. Carleton; then Mr. Stackpole. Then Mr. Thorn, in expectation of whom Fleda's breath had been coming and going painfully all the evening. She could not meet him without a strange mixture of embarrassment and confusion with the gratitude she wished to express, an embarrassment not at all lessened by the air of happy confidence with which he came forward to her. It carried an intimation that almost took away the little strength she had. And if anything could have made his presence more intolerable, it was the feeling she could not get rid of, that it was the cause why Mr. Carleton did not come near her again, though she prolonged her stay in the drawing-room in the hope that he would. It proved to be for Mr. Thorn's benefit alone.
"Well, you staid all the evening, after all," said Constance, as they were going up stairs.
"Yes — I wish I hadn't," said Fleda. "I wonder when I shall be likely to find a chance of getting back to Queechy?"
"You're not fit yet, so you needn't trouble yourself about it," said Constance. "We'll find you plenty of chances."
Fleda could not think of Mr. Thorn without trembling. His manner meant — so much more than it had any right, or than she had counted upon. He seemed — she pressed her hands upon her face to get rid of the impression — he seemed to take for granted precisely that which she had refused to admit; he seemed to reckon as paid for that which she had declined to set a price upon. Her uncle's words and manner came up in her memory. She could see nothing best to do but to get home as fast as possible. She had no one here to fall back upon. Again that vision of father and mother, and grandfather, flitted across her fancy; and though Fleda's heart ended by resting down on that foundation to which it always recurred, it rested with a great many tears.
For several days she denied herself absolutely to morning visitors of every kind. But she could not entirely absent herself from the drawing-room in the evening; and whenever the family were at home there was a regular levee. Mr. Thorn could not be avoided then. He was always there, and always with that same look and manner of satisfied confidence. Fleda was as grave, as silent, as reserved, as she could possibly be, and not be rude; but he seemed to take it in excellent good part, as being half indisposition and half timidity. Fleda set her face earnestly towards home, and pressed Mrs. Evelyn to find her an opportunity, weak or strong, of going there; but for those days as yet none presented itself.
Mr. Carleton was at the house almost as often as Mr. Thorn, seldom staying so long, however, and never having any more to do with Fleda than he had that first evening. Whenever he did come in contact with her, he was, she thought, as grave as he was graceful. That was, to be sure, his common manner in company, yet she could not help thinking there was some difference since the walk they had taken together — and it grieved her.
CHAPTER XVII.
"The best-laid schemes o' mice and men Gang aft ajee."
After a few days, Charlton verified what Constance had said about his not being very fast at Fort Hamilton, by coming again to see them one morning. Fleda asked him if he could not get another furlough to go with her home, but he declared he was just spending one which was near out; and he could not hope for a third in some time; he must be back at his post by the day after to-morrow.
"When do you want to go, coz?"
"I would to-morrow, if I had anybody to go with me," said Fleda, sighing.
"No, you wouldn't," said Constance; "you are well enough to go out now, and you forget we are all to make Mrs. Thorn happy to-morrow night."
"I am not," said Fleda.
"Not? you can't help yourself — you must; you said you would."
"I did not, indeed."
"Well, then, I said it for you, and that will do just as well.
Why, my dear, if you don't — just think! — the Thorns will be in a state — I should prefer to go through a hedge of any description rather than meet the trying demonstrations which will encounter me on every side."
"I am going to Mrs. Decatur's," said Fleda; "she invited me first, and I owe it to her; she has asked me so often and so kindly."
"I shouldn't think you'd enjoy yourself there," said Florence;
"they don't talk a bit of English these nights. If I was going, my dear, I would act as your interpreter, but my destiny lies in another direction."
"If I cannot make anybody understand my French, I will get somebody to condescend to my English," said Fleda.
"Why, do you talk French?" was the instant question from both mouths.
"Unless she has forgotten herself strangely," said Charlton.
"Talk! she will talk to anybody's satisfaction — that happens to differ from her; and I think her tongue cares very little which language it wags in. There is no danger about Fleda's enjoying herself, where people are talking."
Fleda laughed at him, and the Evelyns rather stared at them both.
"But we are all going to Mrs. Thorn's? you can't go alone?"
"I will make Charlton take me," said Fleda; "or rather I will take him, if he will let me. Will you, Charlton? will you take care of me to Mrs. Decatur's to-morrow night?"
"With the greatest pleasure, my dear coz; but I have another engagement in the course of the evening."
"Oh, that is nothing," said Fleda; "if you will only go with me, that is all I care for. You needn't stay but ten minutes.
And you can call for me," she added, turning to the Evelyns, "as you come back from Mrs. Thorn's."
To this no objection could be made, and the ensuing raillery Fleda bore with steadiness at least, if not with coolness; for Charlton heard it, and she was distressed.
She went to Mrs. Decatur's the next evening in greater elation of spirits than she had known since she left her uncle's;
delighted to be missing from the party at Mrs. Thorn's, and hoping that Mr. Lewis would be satisfied with this very plain hint of her mind. A little pleased, too, to feel quite free, alone from too friendly eyes, and ears that had too lively a concern in her sayings and doings. She did not in the least care about going to Mrs. Decatur's; her joy was that she was not at the other place. But there never was elation so outwardly quiet. Nobody would have suspected its existence.
The evening was near half over when Mr. Carleton came in.
Fleda had half hoped he would be there, and now immediately hoped she might have a chance to see him alone, and to thank him for his flowers; she had not been able to do that yet. He presently came up to speak to her, just as Charlton, who had found attraction enough to keep him so long, came to tell her he was going.
"You are looking better," said the former, as gravely as ever, but with an eye of serious interest that made the words something.
"I am better," said Fleda, gratefully.
"So much better that she is in a hurry to make herself worse,"
said her cousin. "Mr. Carleton, you are a professor of medicine, I believe. I have an indistinct impression of your having once prescribed a ride on horseback for somebody;
wouldn't you recommend some measure of prudence to her consideration?"
"In general," Mr. Carleton answered, gravely; "but in the present case I could not venture upon any special prescription, Captain Rossitur."
"As, for instance, that she should remain in New York till she is fit to leave it. By the way, what brought you here again in such a hurry, Fleda? I haven't heard that yet."
The question was rather sudden. Fleda was a little taken by surprise. Her face showed some pain and confusion both. Mr.
Carleton prevented her answer, she could not tell whether with design.
"What imprudence do you charge your cousin with, Captain Rossitur?"
"Why, she is in a great hurry to get back to Queechy, before she is able to go anywhere — begging me to find an escort for her. It is lucky I can't. I didn't know I ever should be glad to be 'posted up' in this fashion, but I am."
"You have not sought very far, Captain Rossitur," said the voice of Thorn behind him. "Here is one that will be very happy to attend Miss Fleda, whenever she pleases."
Fleda's shocked start and change of countenance was seen by more eyes than one pair. Thorn's fell, and a shade crossed his countenance, too, for an instant, that Fleda's vision was too dazzled to see. Mr. Carleton moved away.
"Why are _you_ going to Queechy?" said Charlton, astonished.
His friend was silent a moment, perhaps for want of power to speak. Fleda dared not look at him.
"It is not impossible — unless this lady forbid me. I am not a fixture."
"But what brought you here, man, to offer your services?" said Charlton; "most ungallantly leaving so many pairs of bright eyes to shine upon your absence."
"Mr. Thorn will not find himself in darkness here, Captain Rossitur," said Mrs. Decatur.
"It's my opinion he ought, Ma'am," said Charlton.
"It is my opinion every man ought, who makes his dependance on gleams of sunshine," said Mr. Thorn, rather cynically. "I cannot say I was thinking of brightness, before or behind me."
"I should think not," said Charlton; "you don't look as if you had seen any in a good while."
"A light goes out every now and then," said Thorn; "and it takes one's eyes some time to get accustomed to it. What a singular world we live in, Mrs. Decatur!"
"That is so new an idea," said the lady, laughing, "that I must request an explanation."
"What new experience of its singularity has your wisdom made?"
said his friend. "I thought you and the world knew each other's faces pretty well before."
"Then you have not heard the news?"
"What news?"
"Hum — I suppose it is not about, yet," said Thorn, composedly. "No — you haven't heard it."
"But what, man?" said Charlton; "let's hear your news, for I must be off."
"Why — but it is no more than rumour yet — but it is said that strange things are coming to light about a name that used to be held in very high respect."
"In this city?"
"In this city? — yes; it is said proceedings are afoot against one of our oldest citizens, on charge of a very grave offence."
"Who — and what offence? what do you mean?"
"Is it a secret, Mr. Thorn?" said Mrs. Decatur.
"If you have not heard, perhaps it is as well not to mention names too soon; if it comes out, it will be all over directly;
possibly the family may hush it up, and, in that case, the less said the better; but those have it in hand that will not let it slip through their fingers."
Mrs. Decatur turned away, saying, "How shocking such things were!" and Thorn, with a smile which did not, however, light up his face, said — "You may be off, Charlton, with no concern for the bright eyes you leave behind you; I will endeavour to atone for my negligence elsewhere, by my mindfulness of them."
"Don't excuse you," said Charlton; but his eye catching at the moment another attraction opposite in the form of man or woman, instead of quitting the room, he leisurely crossed it to speak to the new-comer; and Thorn, with an entire change of look and manner, pressed forward, and offered his arm to Fleda, who was looking perfectly white. If his words had needed any commentary, it was given by his eye as it met hers, in speaking the last sentence to Mrs. Decatur. No one was near whom she knew, and Mr. Thorn led her out to a little back room where the gentlemen had thrown off their cloaks, where the air was fresher, and placing her on a seat, stood waiting before her till she could speak to him.
"What do you mean, Mr. Thorn?" Fleda looked as much as said, when she could meet his face.
"I may rather ask you what _you_ mean, Miss Fleda," he answered, gravely.
Fleda drew breath painfully.
"I mean nothing," she said, lowering her head again; "I have done nothing."
"Did you think I meant nothing when I agreed to do all you wished?"
"I thought you said you would do it freely," she said, with a tone of voice that might have touched anybody, there was such a sinking of heart in it.
"Didn't you understand me?"
"And is it all over now?" said Fleda, after a pause.
"Not yet; but it soon may be. A weak hand may stop it now — it will soon be beyond the power of the strongest."
"And what becomes of your promise that it should no more be heard of?" said Fleda, looking up at him with a colourless face, but eyes that put the question forcibly, nevertheless.
"Is any promise bound to stand without its conditions?"
"I made no conditions," said Fleda, quickly.
"Forgive me! but did you not permit me to understand them?"
"No! or if I did, I could not help it."
"Did you say that you wished to help it?" said he, gently.
"I must say so now, then, Mr. Thorn," said Fleda, withdrawing the hand he had taken; "I did not mean or wish you to think so, but I was too ill to speak — almost to know what I did. It was not my fault."
"You do not make it mine, that I chose such a time, selfishly, I grant, to draw from your lips the words that are more to me than life?"
"Cannot you be generous ?" _for once_, she was very near saying.
"Where you are concerned, I do not know how."
Fleda was silent a moment, and then bowed her face in her hands.
"May I not ask that question of you?" said he, bending down and endeavouring to remove them; "will you not say — or look — that word that will make others happy beside me?"
"I cannot, Sir."
"Not for their sakes?" he said, calmly.
"Can you ask me to do for theirs, what I would not for my own?"
"Yes — for mine," he said, with a meaning deliberateness.
Fleda was silent, with a face of white determination.
"It will be beyond _eluding_, as beyond recal, the second time.
I may seem selfish — I am selfish — but, dear Miss Ringgan, you do not see all — you, who make me so, can make me anything else with a touch of your hand — it is selfishness that would be bound to your happiness, if you did but entrust it to me."
Fleda neither spoke nor looked at him, and rose up from her chair.
"Is this _your_ generosity?" he said, pointedly, though gently.
"That is not the question now, Sir," said Fleda, who was trembling painfully. "I cannot do evil that good may come."
"But _evil?_" said he, detaining her — "what evil do I ask of you? to _remove_ evil, I do."
Fleda clasped her hands, but answered calmly — "I cannot make any pretences, Sir; I cannot promise to give what is not in my power."
"In whose power, then?" said he, quickly.
A feeling of indignation came to Fleda's aid, and she turned away. But he stopped her still.
"Do you think I do not understand?" he said, with a covert sneer, that had the keenness, and hardness, and the brightness of steel.
"_I_ do not, Sir," said Fleda.
"Do you think I do not know whom you came here to meet?"
Fleda's glance of reproach was a most innocent one, but it did not check him.
"Has that fellow renewed his old admiration of you?" he went on, in the same tone.
"Do not make me desire his old protection," said Fleda, her gentle face roused to a flush of displeasure.
"Protection!" said Charlton, coming in, "who wants protection?
here it is — protection from what? my old friend Lewis? what the deuce does this lady want of protection, Mr. Thorn?"
It was plain enough that Fleda wanted it, from the way she was drooping upon his arm.
"You may ask the lady herself," said Thorn, in the same tone he had before used; — "I have not the honour to be her spokesman."
"She don't need one," said Charlton; "I addressed myself to you — speak for yourself, man."
"I am not sure that it would be her pleasure I should," said Thorn. "Shall I tell this gentleman, Miss Ringgan, who needs protection, and from what?"
Fleda raised her head, and, putting her hand on his arm, looked a concentration of entreaty — lips were sealed.
"Will you give me," said he, gently taking the hand in his own, "your sign-manual for Captain Rossitur's security? It is not too late. Ask it of her, Sir."
"What does this mean?" said Charlton, looking from his cousin to his friend.
"You shall have the pleasure of knowing, Sir, just so soon as I find it convenient."
"I will have a few words with you on this subject, my fine fellow," said Captain Rossitur, as the other was preparing to leave the room.
"You had better speak to somebody else," said Thorn. "But I am ready."
Charlton muttered an imprecation upon his absurdity, and turned his attention to Fleda, who needed it, and yet desired anything else. For a moment she had an excuse for not answering his questions in her inability; and then, opportunely, Mrs. Decatur came in to look after her; and she was followed by her daughter. Fleda roused all her powers to conceal and command her feelings; rallied herself; said she had been a little weak and faint; drank water, and declared herself able to go back into the drawing-room. To go home would have been her utmost desire, but at the instant her energies were all bent to the one point of putting back thought, and keeping off suspicion. And in the first hurry and bewilderment of distress, the dread of finding herself alone with Charlton, till she had had time to collect her thoughts, would of itself have been enough to prevent her accepting the proposal.
She entered the drawing-room again on Mrs. Decatur's arm, and had stood a few minutes talking or listening, with that same concentration of all her faculties upon the effort to bear up outwardly, when Charlton came up to ask if he should leave her. Fleda made no objection, and he was out of her sight, far enough to be beyond reach or recal, when it suddenly struck her that she ought not to have let him go without speaking to him — without entreating him to see her in the morning before he saw Thorn. The sickness of this new apprehension was too much for poor Fleda's power of keeping up. She quietly drew her arm from Mrs. Decatur's, saying that she would sit down;
and sought out a place for herself, apart from the rest, by an engraving-stand, where for a little while, not to seem unoccupied, she turned over print after print, that she did not see. Even that effort failed at last; and she sat gazing at one of Sir Thomas Lawrence's bright-faced children, and feeling as if in herself the tides of life were setting back upon their fountain preparatory to being still for ever. She became sensible that some one was standing beside the engravings, and looked up at Mr. Carleton.
"Are. you ill?" he said, very gently and tenderly.
The answer was a quick motion of Fleda's hand to her head, speaking sudden pain, and perhaps sudden difficulty of self- command. She did not speak.
"Will you have anything?"
A whispered "No."
"Would you like to return to Mrs. Evelyn's? — I have a carriage here."
With a look of relief that seemed to welcome him as her good angel, Fleda instantly rose up, and took the arm he offered her. She would have hastened from the room then, but he gently checked her pace; and Fleda was immediately grateful for the quiet and perfect shielding from observation that his manner secured her. He went with her up the stairs, and to the very door of the dressing-room. There Fleda hurried on her shoes and mufflers in trembling fear that some one might come and find her, gained Mr. Carleton's arm again, and was placed in the carriage.
The drive was in perfect silence, and Fleda's agony deepened and strengthened with every minute. She had freedom to think, and thought did but carry a torch into chamber after chamber of misery. There seemed nothing to be done. She could not get hold of Charlton; and if she could? — Nothing could be less amenable than his passions to her gentle restraints. Mr. Thorn was still less approachable or manageable, except in one way — that she did not even think of. His insinuations about Mr.
Carleton did not leave even a tinge of embarrassment upon her mind; they were cast from her as insulting absurdities, which she could not think of a second time without shame.
The carriage rolled on with them a long time without a word being said. Mr. Carleton knew that she was not weeping nor faint. But as the light of the lamps was now and then cast within the carriage, he saw that her face looked ghastly; and he saw too, that its expression was not of a quiet sinking under sorrow, nor of an endeavour to bear up against it, but a wild searching gaze into the darkness of _possibilities_. They had near reached Mrs. Evelyn's.
"I cannot see you so," he said, gently touching the hand which lay listlessly beside him. "You are ill!"
Again the same motion of the other hand to her face, the quick token of great pain suddenly stirred.
"For the sake of old times, let me ask," said he — "can nothing be done?"
Those very gentle and delicate tones of sympathy and kindness were too much to bear. The hand was snatched away to be pressed to her face. O that those old times were back again, and she a child that could ask his protection! — no one to give it now.
He was silent a moment. Fleda's head bowed beneath the mental pressure.
"Has Dr. Gregory returned?"
The negative answer was followed by a half-uttered exclamation of longing — checked midway, but sufficiently expressive of her want.
"Do you trust me?" he said, after another second of pausing.
"Perfectly!" said Fleda, amidst her tears, too much excited to know what she was saying, and in her simplicity half forgetting that she was not a child still; — "more than any one in the world!"
The few words he had spoken, and the manner of them, had curiously borne her back years in a minute; she seemed to be under his care more than for the drive home. He did not speak again for a minute; when he did, his tone was very quiet, and lower than before.
"Give me what a friend can have in charge to do for you, and it shall be done."
Fleda raised her head, and looked out of the window, in a silence of doubt. The carriage stopped at Mrs. Evelyn's.
"Not now," said Mr. Carleton, as the servant was about to open the door — "drive round the square — till I speak to you."
Fleda was motionless and almost breathless with uncertainty.
If Charlton could be hindered from meeting Mr. Thorn — but how could Mr. Carleton effect it? But there was that in him or in his manner, which invariably created confidence in his ability, or fear of it, even in strangers; and how much more in her who had a childish but very clear recollection of several points in his character which confirmed the feeling.
And might not something be done, through his means, to facilitate her uncle's escape? of whom she seemed to herself now the betrayer. But to tell him the story! — a person of his high nice notions of character — what a distance it would put even between his friendship and her — but that thought was banished instantly, with one glance at Mr. Thorn's imputation of ungenerousness. To sacrifice herself to _him_ would not have been generosity — to lower herself in the esteem of a different character, she felt, called for it. There was time even then, too, for one swift thought of the needlessness and bitter fruits of wrong-doing. But here they were — should she make them known, and trouble Mr. Carleton, friend though he were, with these miserable matters in which he had no concern?
She sat with a beating heart and a very troubled brow, but a brow as easy to read as a child's. It was the trouble of anxious questioning. Mr. Carleton watched it for a little while — undecided as ever, and more pained.
"You said you trusted me," he said quietly, taking her hand again.
"But — I don't know what you could do, Mr. Carleton," Fleda said, with a trembling voice.
"Will you let me be the judge of that?"
"I cannot bear to trouble you with these miserable things —"
"You cannot," said he, with that same quiet tone, "but by thinking and saying so. I can have no greater pleasure than to take pains for you."
Fleda heard these words precisely, and with the same simplicity as a child would have heard them, and answered with a very frank burst of tears — soon, as soon as possible, according to her custom, driven back, though even in the act of quieting herself, they broke forth again as uncontrollably as at first. But Mr. Carleton had not long to wait. She raised her head again after a short struggle, with the wonted look of patience sitting upon her brow, and wiping away her tears, paused merely for breath and voice. He was perfectly silent.
"Mr. Carleton, I will tell you," she began; "I hardly know whether I ought or ought not" — and her hand went to her forehead for a moment — "but I cannot think to-night — and I have not a friend to apply to" — She hesitated; and then went on, with a voice that trembled and quavered sadly.
"Mr. Thorn has a secret — of my uncle's — in his power — which he promised — without conditions — to keep faithfully; and now insists that he will not — but upon conditions" — "And cannot the conditions be met?"
"No — and, oh, I may as well tell you at once!" said Fleda in bitter sorrow; "it is a crime that he committed" — "Mr. Thorn?"
"No — O no!" said Fleda, weeping bitterly, "not he" — Her agitation was excessive for a moment; then she threw it off, and spoke more collectedly, though with exceeding depression of manner.
"It was long ago — when he was in trouble — he put Mr. Thorn's name to a note, and never was able to take it up; and nothing was ever heard about it till lately; and last week he was going to leave the country, and Mr. Thorn promised that the proceedings should be entirely given up; and that was why I came to town, to find uncle Rolf, and bring him home; and I did, and he is gone; and now Mr. Thorn says, it is all going on again, and that he will not escape this time; and I have done it!" — Fleda writhed again in distress.
"Thorn promised without conditions?"
"Certainly — he promised freely — and now he insists upon them; and you see uncle Rolf would have been safe out of the country now, if it hadn't been for me" — "I think I can undo this snarl," said Mr. Carleton, calmly.
"But that is not all," said Fleda, a little quieted; "Charlton came in this evening when we were talking, and he was surprised to find me so, and Mr. Thorn was in a very ill humour, and some words passed between them, and Charlton threatened to see him again; and oh, if he does!" said poor Fleda — "that will finish our difficulties! — for Charlton is very hot, and I know how it will end — how it must end" — "Where is your cousin to be found?"
"I don't know where he lodges when he is in town."
"You did not leave him at Mrs. Decatur's. Do you know where he is this evening?"
"Yes!" said Fleda, wondering that she should have heard and remembered; "he said he was going to meet a party of his brother officers at Mme. Fouché's — a sister-in-law of his Colonel, I believe."
"I know her. This note — was it the name of the young Mr.
Thorn, or of his father that was used?"
"Of his father."
"Has _he_ appeared at all in this business?"
"No," said Fleda, feeling for the first time that there was something notable about it.
"What sort of person do you take him to be?"
"Very kind — very pleasant, always, he has been to me, and I should think to everybody — very unlike the son."
Mr. Carleton had ordered the coachman back to Mrs. Evelyn's.
"Do you know the amount of the note? It may be desirable that I should not appear uninformed."
"It was for four thousand dollars," Fleda said, in the low voice of shame.
"And when given?"
"I don't know exactly — but six years ago — some time in the winter of '43, it must have been."
He said no more till the carriage stopped; and then, before handing her out of it, lifted her hand to his lips. That carried all the promise Fleda wanted, from him. How oddly — how curiously, her hand kept the feeling of that kiss upon it all night!
CHAPTER XVIII.
"Heat not a furnace for your friend so hot That it may singe yourself."
SHAKESPEARE.
Mr. Carleton went to Madame Fouché's, who received most graciously, as any lady would, his apology for introducing himself unlooked-for, and begged that he would commit the same fault often. As soon as practicable, he made his way to Charlton, and invited him to breakfast with him the next morning.
Mrs. Carleton always said it never was known that Guy was refused anything he had a mind to ask. Charlton, though taken by surprise, and certainly not too much prepossessed in his favour, was won by an influence that, where its owner chose to exert it, was generally found irresistible; and not only accepted the invitation, but was conscious to himself of doing it with a good deal of pleasure. Even when Mr. Carleton made the further request that Captain Rossitur would, in the meantime, see no one on business of any kind, intimating that the reason would then be given, Charlton, though startling a little at this restraint upon his freedom of motion, could do no other than give the desired promise, and with the utmost readiness. Guy then went to Mr. Thorn's. It was, by this time, not early.
"Mr. Lewis Thorn — is he at home?"
"He is, Sir," said the servant, admitting him rather hesitatingly.
"I wish to see him a few moments on business."
"It is no hour for business," said the voice of Mr. Lewis from over the balusters — "I can't see anybody to-night."
"I ask but a few minutes," said Mr. Carleton. "It is important."
"It may be anything!" said Thorn. "I wont do business after twelve o'clock."
Mr. Carleton desired the servant to carry his card, with the same request, to Mr. Thorn the elder.
"What's that?" said Thorn, as the man came up stairs — "my father? — Pshaw! _he_ can't attend to it. Well, walk up, Sir, if you please! — may as well have it over and done with it."
Mr. Carleton mounted the stairs and followed the young gentleman into an apartment, to which he rapidly led the way.
"You've no objection to this, I suppose?" Thorn remarked, as he locked the door behind them.
"Certainly not," said Mr. Carleton, coolly, taking out the key and putting it in his pocket — "my business is private — it needs no witnesses."
"Especially as it so nearly concerns yourself," said Thorn, sneeringly.
"Which part of it, Sir?" said Mr. Carleton, with admirable breeding. It vexed, at the same time that it constrained Thorn.
"I'll let you know, presently!" he said, hurriedly proceeding to the lower end of the room, where some cabinets stood, and unlocking door after door in mad haste.
The place had somewhat the air of a study — perhaps Thorn's private room. A long table stood in the middle of the floor, with materials for writing, and a good many books were about the room, in cases and on the tables, with maps, and engravings, and portfolio's, and a nameless collection of articles — the miscellaneous gathering of a man of leisure and some literary taste.
Their owner presently came back from the cabinets with tokens of a very different kind about him.
"There, Sir!" he said, offering to his guest a brace of most inhospitable-looking pistols — "take one, and take your stand, as soon as you please — nothing like coming to the point at once!"
He was heated and excited even more than his manner indicated.
Mr. Carleton glanced at him, and stood quietly examining the pistol he had taken. It was already loaded.
"This is a business that comes upon me by surprise," he said, calmly. "I don't know what I have to do with this, Mr. Thorn."
"Well, I do," said Thorn, "and that's enough. Take your place, Sir! You escaped me once, but " — and he gave his words dreadful emphasis — "you wont do it the second time!"
"You do not mean," said the other, "that your recollection of such an offence has lived out so many years?"
"No, Sir! No Sir!" said Thorn — "it is not that. I despise it, as I do the offender. You have touched me more nearly."
"Let me know ill what," said Mr. Carleton, turning his pistol's mouth down upon the table, and leaning on it.
"You know already — what do you ask me for?" said Thorn, who was foaming; "if you say you don't, you lie heartily. I'll tell you nothing but out of _this_."
"I have not knowingly injured you, Sir — in a whit."
"Then a Carleton may be a liar," said Thorn, "and you are one — I dare say not the first. Put yourself there, Sir, will you?"
"Well," said Guy, carelessly, "if it is decreed that I am to fight, of course there's no help for it; but as I have business on hand that might not be so well done afterwards, I must beg your attention to that in the first place."
"No, Sir," said Thorn, "I'll attend to nothing — I'll hear nothing from you. I know you! I'll not hear a word. I'll see to the business! Take your stand."
"I will not have anything to do with pistols," said Mr.
Carleton, coolly, laying his out of his hand; "they make too much noise."
"Who cares for the noise?" said Thorn. "It wont hurt you; and the door is locked."
"But people's ears are not," said Guy.
Neither tone, nor attitude, nor look, had changed in the least its calm gracefulness. It began to act upon Thorn.
"Well, in the devil's name, have your own way," said he, throwing down his pistol too, and going back to the cabinets at the lower end of the room — "there are rapiers here, if you like them better — _I_ don't — the shortest the best for me — but here they are — take your choice."
Guy examined them carefully for a few minutes, and then laid them both, with a firm hand upon them, on the table.
"I will choose neither, Mr. Thorn, till you have heard me. I came here to see you on the part of others — I should be a recreant to my charge if I allowed you or myself to draw me into anything that might prevent my fulfilling it. That must be done first."
Thorn looked with a lowering brow on the indications of his opponent's eye and attitude; they left him plainly but one course to take.
"Well, speak and have done," he said, as in spite of himself;
"but I know it already."
"I am here as a friend of Mr. Rossitur."
"Why don't you say a friend of somebody else, and come nearer the truth?" said Thorn.
There was an intensity of expression in his sneer, but pain was there as well as anger; and it was with even a feeling of pity that Mr. Carleton answered — "The truth will be best reached, Sir, if I am allowed to choose my own words."
There was no haughtiness in the steady gravity of this speech, whatever there was in the quiet silence he permitted to follow. Thorn did not break it.
"I am informed of the particulars concerning this prosecution of Mr. Rossitur — I am come here to know if no terms can be obtained."
"No!" said Thorn — "no terms — I wont speak of terms. The matter will be followed up now till the fellow is lodged in jail, where he deserves to be."
"Are you aware, Sir, that this, if done, will be the cause of very great distress to a family who have not deserved it?"
"That can't be helped," said Thorn. "Of course, it must cause distress, but you can't act upon that. Of course, when a man turns rogue, he ruins his family — that's part of his punishment — and a just one."
"The law is just," said Mr. Carleton, "but a friend may be merciful."
"I don't pretend to be a friend," said Thorn, viciously, "and I have no cause to be merciful. I like to bring a man to public shame when he has forfeited his title to anything else;
and I intend that Mr. Rossitur shall become intimately acquainted with the interior of the State's prison."
"Did it ever occur to you that public shame _might_ fall upon other than Mr. Rossitur, and without the State prison?"
Thorn fixed a somewhat startled look upon the steady powerful eye of his opponent, and did not like its meaning.
"You must explain yourself, Sir," he said, haughtily.
"I am acquainted with _all_ the particulars of this proceeding, Mr. Thorn. If it goes abroad, so surely will they."
"She told you, did she?" said Thorn, in a sudden flash of fury.
Mr. Carleton was silent, with his air of imperturbable reserve, telling and expressing nothing but a cool independence that put the world at a distance.
"Ha!" said Thorn, "it is easy to see why our brave Englishman comes here to solicit 'terms' for his honest friend Rossitur — he would not like the scandal of franking letters to Sing Sing. Come, Sir!" he said, snatching up the pistol, "our business is ended — come, I say, or I wont wait for you."
But the pistol was struck from his hand.
"Not yet," said Mr. Carleton, calmly, "you shall have your turn at these — mind, I promise you; but my business must be done first — till then, let them alone."
"Well, what is it?" said Thorn, impatiently. "Rossitur will be a convict, I tell you; so you'll have to give up all thoughts of his niece, or pocket her shame along with her. What more have you got to say? that's all your business, I take it."
"You are mistaken, Mr. Thorn," said Mr. Carleton, gravely.
"Am I? In what ?"
"In every position of your last speech."
"It don't affect your plans and views, I suppose, personally, whether this prosecution is continued or not?"
"It does not in the least."
"It is indifferent to you, I suppose, what sort of a queen consort you carry to your little throne of a provinciality down yonder?"
"I will reply to you, Sir, when you come back to the subject,"
said Mr. Carleton, coldly.
"You mean to say that your pretensions have not been in the way of mine?"
"I have made none, Sir."
"Doesn't she like you?"
"I have never asked her."
"Then, what possessed her to tell you all this to-night?"
"Simply because I was an old friend, and the only one at hand, I presume."
"And you do not look for any reward of your services, of course?"
"I wish for none, Sir, but her relief."
"Well, it don't signify," said Thorn, with a mixture of expressions in his face — "if I believed you, which I don't — it don't signify a hair what you do, when once this matter is known. I should never think of advancing my pretensions into a felon's family."
"You know that the lady in whose welfare you take so much interest will in that case suffer aggravated distress as having been the means of hindering Mr. Rossitur's escape."
"Can't help it," said Thorn, beating the table with a ruler;
"so she has; she must suffer for it. It isn't my fault."
"You are willing, then, to abide the consequences of a full disclosure of all the circumstances? — for part will not come out without the whole."
"There is happily nobody to tell them," said Thorn, with a sneer.
"Pardon me — they will not only be told, but known thoroughly in all the circles in this country that know Mr. Thorn's name."
"_The lady_," said Thorn, in the same tone, "would hardly relish such a publication of _her_ name — _her welfare_ would be scantily advantaged by it."
"I will take the risk of that upon myself," said Mr. Carleton, quietly; "and the charge of the other."
"You dare not !" said Thorn. "You shall not go alive out of this room to do it! Let me have it, Sir! You said you would."
His passion was at a fearful height, for the family pride which had been appealed to, felt a touch of fear, and his other thoughts were confirmed again, besides the dim vision of a possible thwarting of all his plans. Desire almost concentred itself upon revenge against the object that threatened them. He had thrown himself again towards the weapons which lay beyond his reach, but was met, and forcibly withheld from them.
"Stand back!" said Mr. Carleton. "I said I would, but I am not ready — finish this business first."
"What is there to finish?" said Thorn, furiously — "you will never live to do anything out of these doors again — you are mocking yourself."
"My life is not in your hands, Sir, and I will settle this matter before I put it in peril. If not with you, with Mr.
Thorn, your father, to whom it more properly belongs."
"You cannot leave the room to see him," said Thorn, sneeringly.
"That is at my pleasure," said the other, "unless hindered by means I do not think you will use."
Thorn was silent.
"Will you yield anything of justice, once more, in favour of this distressed family?"
"That is, yield the whole, and let the guilty go free?"
"When the punishment of the offender would involve that of so many unoffending, who, in this case, would feel it with peculiar severity."
"He deserves it, if it was only for the money he has kept me out of; he ought to be made to refund what he has stolen, if it took the skin off his back!"
"That part of his obligation," said Mr. Carleton, "I am authorised to discharge, on condition of having the note given up. I have a cheque with me which I am commissioned to fill up, from one of the best names here. I need only the date of the note, which the giver of the cheque did not know."
Thorn hesitated, again tapping the table with the ruler in a troubled manner. He knew, by the calm erect figure before him and the steady eye he did not care to meet, that the threat of disclosure would be kept. He was not prepared to brave it, in case his revenge should fail; and if it did not — "It is deuced folly," he said, at length, with a half laugh, "for I shall have it back again in five minutes, if my eye don't play me a trick; however, if you will have it so, I don't care. There are chances in all things."
He went again to the cabinets, and presently brought the endorsed note. Mr. Carleton gave it a cool and careful examination, to satisfy himself of its being the true one, and then delivered him the cheque — the blank duly filled up.
"There are chances in nothing, Sir," he said, as he proceeded to burn the note effectually in the candle.
"What do you mean?"
"I mean that there is a Supreme Disposer of all things, who, among the rest, has our lives in his hand. And now, Sir, I will give you that chance at my life for which you have been so eagerly wishing."
"Well, take your place," said Thorn, seizing his pistol, "and take your arms, put yourself at the end of the table, never mind the noise!"
"I shall stand here," said Mr. Carleton, quietly folding his arms; "you may take your place where you please."
"But you are not armed," said Thorn, impatiently: "why don't you get ready? what are you waiting for?"
"I have nothing to do with arms," said Mr. Carleton, smiling;
"I have no wish to hurt you, Mr. Thorn; I bear you no ill- will. But you may do what you please with me."
"But you promised!" said Thorn, in desperation.
"I abide by my promise, Sir."
Thorn's pistol hand fell — he looked _dreadfully_. There was a silence of several minutes.
"Well?" said Mr. Carleton, looking up and smiling.
"I can do nothing, unless you will," said Thorn, hoarsely, and looking hurriedly away.
"I am at your pleasure, Sir! But, on my own part, I have none to gratify."
There was silence again, during which Thorn's face was pitiable in its darkness. He did not stir.
"I did not come here in enmity, Mr. Thorn," said Guy, after a little, approaching him — "I have none now. If you believe me, you will throw away the remains of yours, and take my hand in pledge of it."
Thorn was ashamed and confounded, in the midst of passions that made him at the moment a mere wreck of himself. He inwardly drew back exceedingly from the proposal. But the grace with which the words were said wrought upon all the gentlemanly character that belonged to him, and made it impossible not to comply. The pistol was exchanged for Mr.
Carleton's hand.
"I need not assure you," said the latter, "that nothing of what we have talked of to-night shall ever be known or suspected, in any quarter, unless by your means."
Thorn's answer was merely a bow, and Mr. Carleton withdrew, his quondam antagonist lighting him ceremoniously to the door.
It was easy for Mr. Carleton the next morning to deal with his guest at the breakfast-table.
The appointments of the service were such as of themselves to put Charlton in a good humour, if he had not come already provided with that happy qualification; and the powers of manner and conversation which his entertainer brought into play, not only put them into the back-ground of Captain Rossitur's perceptions, but even made him merge certain other things in fascination, and lose all thought of what probably had called him there. Once before, he had known Mr. Carleton come out in a like manner, but this time he forgot to be surprised.
The meal was two-thirds over before the business that had drawn them together was alluded to.
"I made an odd request of you last night, Captain Rossitur,"
said his host; "you haven't asked for an explanation."
"I had forgotten all about it," said Rossitur, candidly. "I am inconséquent enough myself not to think everything odd that requires an explanation."
"Then I hope you will pardon me if mine seem to touch upon what is not my concern. You had some cause to be displeased with Mr. Thorn's behaviour last night?"
Who told you as much? — was in Rossitur's open eyes, and upon his tongue; but few ever asked naughty questions of Mr.
Carleton. Charlton's eyes came back, not indeed to their former dimensions, but to his plate, in silence.
"He was incomprehensible," he said, after a minute: "and didn't act like himself; I don't know what was the matter. I shall call him to account for it."
"Captain Rossitur, I am going to ask you a favour."
"I will grant it with the greatest pleasure," said Charlton — "if it lie within my power."
"A wise man's addition," said Mr. Carleton; "but I trust you will not think me extravagant. I will hold myself much obliged to you, if you will let Mr. Thorn's folly, or impertinence, go this time without notice."
Charlton absolutely laid down his knife in astonishment; while at the same moment this slight let to the assertion of his dignity roused it to uncommon pugnaciousness.
"Sir — Mr. Carleton" — he stammered — "I would be very happy to grant anything in my power —but this, Sir — really goes beyond it."
"Permit me to say," said Mr. Carleton, "that I have myself seen Thorn upon the business that occasioned his discomposure, and that it has been satisfactorily arranged; so that nothing more is to be gained or desired from a second interview."
Who gave you authority to do any such thing? was again in Charlton's eyes, and an odd twinge crossed his mind; but, as before, his thoughts were silent.
"_My_ part of the business cannot have been arranged," he said, "for it lies in a question or two that I must put to the gentleman myself."
"What will that question or two probably end in?" said Mr.
Carleton, significantly.
"I can't tell!" said Rossitur; "depends on himself, it will end according to his answers."
"Is his offence so great that it cannot be forgiven upon my entreaty?"
"Mr. Carleton!" said Rossitur — "I would gladly pleasure you, Sir; but, you see, this is a thing a man owes to himself."
"What thing, Sir?"
"Why, not to suffer impertinence to be offered him with impunity."
"Even though the punishment extend to hearts at home that must feel it far more heavily than the offender?"
"Would you suffer yourself to be insulted, Mr. Carleton?" said Rossitur, by way of a mouth-stopper.
"Not if I could help it," said Mr. Carleton, smiling; "but, if such a misfortune happened, I don't know how it would be repaired by being made a matter of life and death."
"But honour might," said Rossitur.
"Honour is not reached, Captain Rossitur. Honour dwells in a strong citadel, and a squib against the walls does in no wise affect their security."
"But, also, it is not consistent with honour to sit still and suffer it."
"Question. The firing of a cracker, I think, hardly warrants a sally."
"It calls for chastisement, though," said Rossitur, a little shortly.
"I don't know that," said Mr. Carleton, gravely. "We have it on the highest authority that it is the glory of man to _pass by_ a transgression."
"But you can't go by that," said Charlton, a little fidgeted;
"the world wouldn't get along so; men must take care of themselves."
"Certainly. But what part of themselves is cared for in this resenting of injuries?"
"Why, their good name!"
"As how affected? — pardon me."
"By the world's opinion," said Rossitur; "which stamps every man with something worse than infamy who cannot protect his own standing."
"That is to say," said Mr. Carleton, seriously, "that Captain Rossitur will punish a fool's words with death, or visit the last extremity of distress upon those who are dearest to him, rather than leave the world in any doubt of his prowess."
"Mr. Carleton!" said Rossitur, colouring — "what do you mean by speaking so, Sir?"
"Not to displease you, Captain Rossitur."
"Then you count the world's opinion for nothing?"
"For less than nothing — compared with the regards I have named."
"You would brave it without scruple?"
"I do not call him a brave man who would not, Sir."
"I remember," said Charlton, half laughing — "you did it yourself once; and I must confess I believe nobody thought you lost anything by it."
"But forgive me for asking," said Mr. Carleton — "is this terrible world a party to _this_ matter? In the request which I made — and which I have not given up, Sir — do I presume upon any more than the sacrifice of a little private feeling?"
"Why, yes," said Charlton, looking somewhat puzzled, "for I promised the fellow I would see to it, and I must keep my word."
"And you know how that will of necessity issue."
"I can't consider that, Sir; that is a secondary matter. I must do what I told him I would."
"At all hazards?" said Mr. Carleton.
"What hazards?"
"Not hazard, but certainty — of incurring a reckoning far less easy to deal with."
"What, do you mean with yourself?" said Rossitur.
"No, Sir, said Mr. Carleton, a shade of even sorrowful expression crossing his face; "I mean with one whose displeasure is a more weighty matter; one who has declared very distinctly, 'Thou shalt not kill.' "
"I am sorry for it," said Rossitur, after a disturbed pause of some minutes — "I wish you had asked me anything else; but we can't take this thing in the light you do, Sir. I wish Thorn had been in any spot of the world but at Mrs. Decatur's, last night, or that Fleda hadn't taken me there; but since he was, there is no help for it — I must make him account for his behaviour, to her as well as to me. I really don't know how to help it, Sir."
"Let me beg you to reconsider that," Mr. Carleton said, with a smile which disarmed offence — "for, if you will not help it, I must."
Charlton looked in doubt for a moment, and then asked how he would help it.
"In that case, I shall think it my duty to have you bound over to keep the peace."
He spoke gravely now, and with that quiet tone which always carries conviction. Charlton stared unmistakably, and in silence.
"You are not in earnest?" he then said.
"I trust you will permit me to leave you for ever in doubt on that point," said Mr. Carleton, with again a slight giving way of the muscles of his face.
"I cannot, indeed," said Rossitur. "Do you mean what you said just now?"
"Entirely."
"But, Mr. Carleton," said Rossitur, flushing, and not knowing exactly how to take him up — "is this the manner of one gentleman towards another?"
He had not chosen right, for he received no answer but an absolute quietness which needed no interpretation. Charlton was vexed and confused, but, somehow, it did not come into his head to pick a quarrel with his host, in spite of his irritation. That was, perhaps, because he felt it to be impossible.
"I beg your pardon," he said, most unconsciously verifying Fleda's words in his own person — "but, Mr. Carleton, do me the favour to say that I have misunderstood your words. They are incomprehensible to me, Sir."
"I must abide by them nevertheless, Captain Rossitur," Mr.
Carleton answered, with a smile. "I will not permit this thing to be done, while, as I believe, I have the power to prevent it. You see," he said, smiling again, "I put in practice my own theory."
Charlton looked exceedingly disturbed, and maintained a vexed and irresolute silence for several minutes, realizing the extreme disagreeableness of having more than his match to deal with.
"Come, Captain Rossitur," said the other, turning suddenly round upon him — "say that you forgive me what you know was meant in no disrespect to you."
"I certainly should not," said Rossitur, yielding, however, with a half laugh, "if it were not for the truth of the proverb, that it takes two to make a quarrel."
"Give me your hand upon that. And now that the question of honour is taken out of your hands, grant, not to me, but to those for whom I ask it, your promise to forgive this man."
Charlton hesitated, but it was difficult to resist the request, backed as it was with weight of character and grace of manner, along with its intrinsic reasonableness; and he saw no other way so expedient of getting out of his dilemma.
"I ought to be angry with somebody," he said, half laughing, and a little ashamed; — "if you will point out any substitute for Thorn, I will let him go, since I cannot help myself, with pleasure."
"I will bear it," said Mr. Carleton, lightly. "Give me your promise for Thorn, and hold me your debtor in what amount you please."
"Very well — I forgive him," said Rossitur; — "and now, Mr.
Carleton I shall have a reckoning with you some day for this."
"I will meet it. When you are next in England, you shall come down to — shire, and I will give you any satisfaction you please."
They parted in high good-humour; but Charlton looked grave as he went down the staircase; and, very oddly, all the way down to Whitehall his head was running upon the various excellencies and perfections of his cousin Fleda.
CHAPTER XIX.
"There is a fortune coming Towards you, dainty, that will take thee thus, And set thee aloft."
BEN JONSON.
That day was spent by Fleda in the never-failing headache which was sure to visit her after any extraordinary nervous agitation, or too great mental or bodily trial. It was severe this time, not only from the anxiety of the preceding night, but from the uncertainty that weighed upon her all day long.
The person who could have removed the uncertainty came, indeed, to the house, but she was too ill to see anybody.
The extremity of pain wore itself off with the day, and at evening she was able to leave her room and come down stairs.
But she was ill yet, and could do nothing but sit in the corner of the sofa, with her hair unbound, and Florence gently bathing her head with cologne. Anxiety as well as pain had, in some measure, given place to exhaustion, and she looked a white embodiment of endurance, which gave a shock to her friends' sympathy. Visitors were denied, and Constance and Edith devoted their eyes and tongues at least to her service, if they could do no more.
It happened that Joe Manton was out of the way, holding an important conference with a brother usher next door, — a conference that he had no notion would be so important when he began it, when a ring on his own premises summoned one of the maid-servants to the door. She knew nothing about "not at home," and unceremoniously desired the gentleman to "walk up,"
— "the ladies were in the drawing-room."
The door had been set wide open for the heat, and Fleda was close in the corner behind it, gratefully permitting Florence's efforts with the _cologne_, which yet she knew could avail nothing but the kind feelings of the operator; for herself — patiently waiting her enemy's time. Constance was sitting on the floor looking at her.
"I can't conceive how you can bear so much," she said, at length.
Fleda thought how little she knew what was borne!
"Why, you could bear it, I suppose, if you had to," said Edith, philosophically.
"She knows she looks most beautiful," said Florence, softly passing her cologned hands down over the smooth hair — "she knows ' Il faut souffrir pour être belle.' "
"La migraine ne se guérit avec les douceurs," said Mr.
Carleton, entering — "try something sharp, Miss Evelyn."
"Where are we to get it?" said Constance, springing up, and adding, in a most lack-a-daisical aside to her mother — "Mamma! — the fowling-piece! — Our last vinegar hardly comes under the appellation; and you don't expect to find anything volatile in this house, Mr. Carleton?"
He smiled.
"Have you none for grave occasions, Miss Constance?"
"I wont retort the question about 'something sharp,' " said Constance, arching her eyebrows, "because it is against my principles to make people uncomfortable; but you have certainly brought in some medicine with you, for Miss Ringgan's cheeks, a little while ago, were as pure as her mind — from a tinge of any sort — and now, you see —"
"My dear Constance," said her mother, "Miss Ringgan's cheeks will stand a much better chance if you come away and leave her in peace. How can she get well with such a chatter in her ears?"
"Mr. Carleton and I, Mamma, are conferring upon measures of relief, and Miss Ringgan gives token of improvement already."
"For which I am very little to be thanked," said Mr. Carleton.
"But I am not a bringer of bad news, that she should look pale at the sight of me."
"Are you a bringer of any news?" said Constance, "Oh, do let us have them, Mr. Carleton! — I am dying for news — I haven't heard a bit to-day."
"What is the news, Mr. Carleton?" said her mother's voice, from the more distant region of the fire.
"I believe there are no general news, Mrs. Evelyn."
"Are there any particular news?" said Constance. "I like particular news infinitely the best."
"I am sorry, Miss Constance, I have none for you. But, will this headache yield to nothing?"
"Fleda prophesied that it would to time," said Florence; "she would not let us try much beside."
"And I must confess there has been no volatile agency employed at all," said Constance; "I never knew time have less of it, and Fleda seemed to prefer him for her physician."
"He hasn't been a good one to-day," said Edith, nestling affectionately to her side. "Isn't it better, Fleda?" for she had covered her eyes with her hand.
"Not just now," said Fleda, softly.
"It is fair to change physicians if the first fails," said Mr.
Carleton. "I have had a slight experience in headache-curing;
if you will permit me, Miss Constance, I will supersede time and try a different prescription."
He went out to seek it, and Fleda leaned her head in her hand, and tried to quiet the throbbing heart, every pulsation of which was felt so keenly at the seat of pain. She knew, from Mr. Carleton's voice and manner — she _thought_ she knew — that he had exceeding good tidings for her; once assured of that, she would soon be better; but she was worse now.
"Where is Mr. Carleton gone?" said Mrs. Evelyn.
"I haven't the least idea, Mamma — he has ventured upon an extraordinary undertaking, and has gone off to qualify himself, I suppose. I can't conceive why he didn't ask Miss Ringgan's permission to change her physician instead of mine."
"I suppose he knew there was no doubt about that," said Edith, hitting the precise answer of Fleda's thoughts.
"And what should make him think there was any doubt about mine?" said Constance, tartly.
"Oh, you know," said her sister, "you are so odd, nobody can tell what you will take a fancy to."
"You are extremely liberal in your expressions, at least, Miss Evelyn, I must say," said Constance, with a glance of no doubtful meaning. "Joe — did you let Mr. Carleton in?"
"No, Ma'am."
"Well, let him in next time, and don't let in anybody else."
Whereafter the party relapsed into silent expectation.
It was not many minutes before Mr. Carleton returned.
"Tell your friend, Miss Constance," he said, putting an exquisite little vinaigrette into her hand, "that I have nothing worse for her than that."
"Worse than this!" said Constance, examining it. "Mr.
Carleton, I doubt exceedingly whether smelling this will afford Miss Ringgan any benefit."
"Why, Miss Constance?"
"Because it has made me sick only to look at it!"
"There will be no danger for her," he said, smiling.
"Wont there? Well, Fleda, my dear, here, take it," said the young lady; "I hope you are differently constituted from me, for I feel a sudden pain since I saw it; but as you keep your eyes shut, and so escape the sight of this lovely gold chasing, perhaps it will do you no mischief."
"It will do her all the more good for that," said Mrs. Evelyn.